[]

CONTENTS

[]

[]

-   AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

List of acronyms

AFLP

AFST

AMRSN

AMS

AST

BAL

BSI

CAM

CARD

CAUTI

CDS

CGPS

CLABSI

CLSI

CoNS

CRAB

CRE

CSF

DI

DEC

DTR

ESBLs

GPC

GNB

HAI

HCAI

HCWs

ICU

IPC

IV

OPD

LOS

LRT

MBL

MFS

MIC

MLST

MRSA

MSSA

NFGNB

OXA

PBP2a

PCV

PMQR

QUAST

RC

RGI

ROM

SCC mec

SI

Amplified fragment length polymorphism

Antifungal susceptibility testing

Antimicrobial Resistance Research & Surveillance Network

Antimicrobial Susceptibility

Antimicrobial Susceptibility Testing

Bronchoalveolar lavage

Blood stream infections

COVID-19–associated mucormycosis

Comprehensive Antibiotic Resistance Database

Catheter associated urinary tract infections

Coding sequence regions

Center for Genomic Pathogen Surveillance

Catheter associated blood stream infections

Clinical & Laboratory Standards Institute

Coagulase-negative Staphylococci

Carbapenem-resistant Acinetobacter baumannii

Carbapenem resistant Enterobacterales

Cerebrospinal fluid

Deep infections

Diarrheagenic E coli

Difficult to treat

Extended spectrum beta lactamases

Gram-positive cocci

Gram-negative bacteria

Hospital acquired Infections

Health Care Associated infections

Health care workers

Intensive care unit

Infection prevention and Control

Intravenous

Out-patient department

Length of stay

Lower Respiratory tract

Metallo-beta-lactamase

Major Facilitator superfamily

Minimum inhibitory concertation

Multi-locus sequence typing

Methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus

Methicillin sensitive Staphylococcus aureus

Non fermenting Gram-negative bacilli

Oxacillinases

Penicillin binding protein 2a

Pnuemococcal Conjugate Vaccine

Plasmid mediated quinolone resistance

Quality assessment tool

Regional centers

Resistance gene identifier

rhino-orbital mucormycosis

Staphylococcal cassette chromosome mec

Superficial infections

[]

-   AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

SD

SS

ST

STR

TMP-SMX

TRF

UTI

VAP

VRE

VVE

WGS

XDR

Standard deviation

Sterile body fluids

Sequence types

Short tandem repeat

Trimethoprim sulfamethoxazole

Tandem repeat finder

Urinary Tract Infections

Ventilator Associated Pnuemonia

Vancomycin-resistant enterococci

Vanconycin Variable Enterococcus

Whole-genome sequencing

Extensively drug-resistant

[]

-   AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

Executive summary

ICMR- Antimicrobial Resistance Surveillance network

The Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR) has been supporting
research on antimicrobial resistance through the Antimicrobial
Resistance Research & Surveillance Network (AMRSN) since 2013. The data
collected from the network has enabled compilation of drug resistance
data on six pathogenic groups on antimicrobial resistance from the
country. Data collected from the network is used to track resistance
trends and to better understand mechanisms of resistance in the key
priority pathogens using genomics and whole genome sequencing (WGS).
This is the sixth detailed report on AMR trends and patterns from the
country, published by ICMR. Since the network collects data from
tertiary care hospitals, the data presented in this report is not
reflective of the community levels of AMR in the country and should not
be extrapolated to community settings.

This report also includes the interpretation of antibiograms from
OPD/Ward/ICU which is crucial for assessing the impact of antimicrobial
resistance and its implications in clinical practice for empirical use
of antibiotics. This further helps in identifying potential areas for
interventions and improvements in antibiotic stewardship practices.

Highlights of surveillance data 2022:

-   This report presents data from January 1st, 2022 to December
      31st, 2022. Total number of culture positive isolates studied
      during the year 2022 was 1,07,053.

-   Escherichia coli was the most commonly isolated pathogen followed by
      the Klebsiella pneumoniae, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Acinetobacter
      baumannii, and Staphylococcus aureus.

-   Among Enterobacterales, Escherichia coli, Klebsiella pneumoniae,
      Citrobacter koseri and Enterobacter cloacae isolated from
      out-patients were more susceptible than those from in-patients for
      all drugs tested.

-   Imipenem susceptibility of E. coli has dropped steadily from 81% in
      2017 to 66% in 2022 and that of Klebsiella pneumoniae dropped
      steadily from 59% in 2017 to 42% in 2022.

-   With regards to molecular characterisation of β-lactamases in
      Escherichia coli isolates, CTXM-15 (39%) was the most common
      β-lactamases identified followed by OXA-1 (34%) and CTXM-1 (21%)
      and for Klebsiella pneumoniae, SHV (55%) was the most common
      followed by CTXM-15 (37%) and OXA-48 (25%); but there was marked
      variability in distribution of β-lactamases among regional
      centers.

[]

-   AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

-   In P. aeruginosa, the susceptibility percentage to anti-pseudomonal
      cephalosporin such as ceftazidime (56.4% vs 47.1%) and cefepime
      (60.3% vs 49.8%) was higher in wards isolates as compared to ICU.

-   There was no change in the trend of susceptibility to
      piperacillin/tazobactam, ceftazidime and aminoglycosides in P.
      aeruginosa. All the tested P. aeruginosa isolates were highly
      susceptible to colistin and there was no change in the trend of
      susceptibility to colistin for the five years. Nearly 40% of
      carbapenem resistant P. aeroginosa isolates harbour Class B type
      of β-lactamases (Metallo-β-lactamase), with NDM being the most
      common.

-   Resistance to carbapenems in Acinetobacter baumannii was recorded as
      87.8% in the year 2022, limiting the availability of available
      treatment options. In A. baumannii, there is no significant change
      in the susceptibility trends to all the tested antibiotics
      compared to last year. Susceptibility to minocycline was close to
      58% to make it the most susceptible antibiotic after colistin for
      Acinetobacter baumannii. Similar to previous years, blaOXA-23-like
      was the only predominant carbapenemase across all the centers
      contributing to 76% of carbapenem resistance.

-   Among CLABSI causing pathogens, Gram-negative organisms (70.9%) were
      responsible for most CLABSI, followed by Gram-positive (16.9%) and
      fungal pathogens (12.2%), same was also true for other device
      associated infections like CAUTI and VAP.

-   75% of Klebsiella pneumoniae and 88% of Acinetobacter baumannii
      causing blood stream infections (BSIs) in ICUs were imipenem
      resistant. Nearly 87% of

  Staphylococcus aureus and around 42% of Enterococcus faecium causing
  BSIs in ICUs were respectively oxacillin and vancomycin resistant.
  Hence, the prevalence of AMR in ICU is very high, so focus on
  infection control practices in ICU and other critical areas should be
  top priority.

-   In Staphylococcus aureus, susceptibility to erythromycin,
      clindamycin, ciprofloxacin and co-trimoxazole was more evident in
      MSSA when compared to MRSA. MRSA rates are increasing each year
      from 2016 to 2021 (28.4% to 42.6%). The anti MRSA antibiotics such
      as vancomycin and teicoplanin showed excellent in vitro activity
      (nearly 100% against MRSA isolates). Linezolid resistance was
      encountered very rarely. Levonadifloxacin was tested on 771
      isolates of MRSA, and all of them were shown to be susceptible. As
      per available literature (limited to in-vitro and Phase 1 and
      Phase 2 clinical studies) , it appears to be highly efficient
      against acute bacterial skin and skin structure infections, as
      well as bacteraemia and diabetic foot infections.

-   In enterococci, vancomycin resistance was 16.7% slightly higher than
      the rate in 2021(14.9%). However, the rate was 5 times higher
      in E. faecium compared to E.

[]

-   AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

  faecalis (27% vs 5.3%). Vancomycin resistance among CSF isolates was
  much higher than the overall rate.

-   The detection of Enterococcus species other than faecalis and
      faecium in high numbers is also significant as some of these
      species are intrinsically resistant to glycopeptides. Hence
      speciation of enterococci is of clinical significance.

-   With regards to S. pneumoniae, the non-vaccine serotypes (compared
      to PCV-10) were more than 50% of the total isolates.
      Susceptibility of pencillin among meningeal isolates of S.
      pneumoniae was down to just 32% and that of cefotaxime was 82%,
      whereas among non-meningeal isolates, susceptibility to both these
      drugs was close to 100%. Hence, monotherapy with either of these
      antibiotics is not recommended for CNS infections, ICMR guidelines
      of combination therapy (cephalosporins with vancomycin) is
      recommended for meningitis.

-   Ceftriaxone (96.1% susceptible), Cefixime (94 % susceptible),
      trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (92% susceptible) and azithromycin
      (97.4% susceptible) showed very good susceptibility patterns for
      Salmonella typhi isolates. Fluoroquinolones show very poor
      susceptibility patterns (> 95% resistance) for Salmonella typhi
      isolates

-   Hence, TMP-SMX and azithromycin remain very good oral options for
      treatment of patients with enteric fever whereas IV Ceftriaxone
      may be used for patients admitted with Enteric Fever. Empirical
      use of fluoroquinolones is not justified to treat Enteric fever.

-   There has been no significant change in the overall antimicrobial
      susceptibility pattern of Salmonella Typhi or S. Paratyphi A from
      India and the pattern remaining uniform across all the
      participating centers in the AMR network. S.Typhi susceptibility
      to cephalosporins and azithromycin has shown a declining trend as
      compared to the last year. Other drugs which retained good
      susceptility for Salmonella Typhi or S. Paratyphi A were
      ampicillin, chloramphenicol and trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole.

-   Diarhogenic E. coli, Aeromonas spp. and Salmonella spp. were most
      common pathogens among diarrheal pathogens reported by the
      network. Antibiograms of these isolates showed, high rates of
      resistance to fluoroquinolones; more than 90% isolates of
      Diarhogenic E. coli and Aeromonas spp. were resistant to
      fluoroquinolones. Hence, empirical use of ciprofloxacin or
      norfloxacin is not justified for patients with diarrhoea.

-   In fungal pathogens, antifungal susceptibility profiling revealed
      more than 93% fluconazole susceptibility in C. albicans and C.
      tropicalis but declining susceptibility rates (77%-85%) were
      reported in C. utilis, C. parapsilosis and C. glabrata thus
      requiring close monitoring in next few years.

[]

-   AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

-   C. auris and C. krusei were predominantly resistant to fluconazole
      with extremely low susceptibility percentages of 1.9% and 11.8%,
      respectively. High levels of voriconazole resistance in C.
      albicans also need to be closely examined

-   There was a decline in isolation rates of Candida species
      in 2022. C. tropicalis isolation dropped from 1.4% in 2017 to 0.6%
      in 2022. Isolation rates of C. auris have remained same from 2017
      to 2022.

-   Aspergillus flavus was the most commonly identified Aspergillus
      species followed by A. fumigatus. Both Aspergillus flavus and
      fumigates showed excellent susceptibility (close to 100%) to
      voriconazole, whereas susceptibity for Amphotericin B was 87.8%
      for Aspergillus flavus and 69.2% for A. fumigatus.

[]

-   AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

  Key takeaways: Interpr etataions of common syndromic isolates and
  implications in clinical p ractice

[]

[] Urine

[]

  Escherichia coli and Klebsiella pneumoniae are most common organisms
  isolated from urine from OPD, wards and ICU.

[]

[] Fosfomycin (96.9% susceptible) and Nitrofurantoin

[]

  (91.3% susceptible) showed very good susceptibility patterns in E coli
  urinary isolates particularly in OPD and ward patients. Hence or al
  fosfomycin and oral nitrofurantoin may be used to treat cystitis.

[]

  Amikacin (89.5% suscepti ble) and Ertapenem (80.8% susceptible) showed
  very good susceptibility [] patterns in E coli and Klebsiella
  pneumoniae urinary []

[]

  isolates particularly in OPD and ward patients. Hence IV Amikacin and
  IV Erta penem may be used to treat upper UTI or patient presenting
  with fever and urinary symptoms.

[]

  Stool

  Diarhogenic E. coli, Aeromon as spp. and Salmonella spp. were most
  common pa thogens isolated from stool samples of patients pre senting
  with diarrhoea in OPD or getting admitted in wards.

  Antibiograms of these isolates showed, high rates of resistance to
  fluoroquinolon es; more than 90% isolates of Diarhogenic E. coli and
  Aeromonas spp. were resistant to fluoroquinolones. Hence, empirical
  use of ciprofloxacin or norfloxacin is not justified for patients with
  diarrhoea.

  Among the tested isol ates, trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole and
  azithromycin showed good susceptible rates to Salmonella spp.,
  Diarhogenic E. coli and Shigella respectively.

[]

  8 AMR Surveillance Netw ork, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

[]

  Pus

  Staphylococcus aureus was the most commonly isolated organism (> 30%)
  from pus taken from OPD patients, whereas Escherichia coli and
  Klebsiella pneumoniae we re most commonly isolated from pus taken for
  ward and ICU patients.

  Clindamycin(79%susceptible)and

  trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (72% susceptible) showed good
  susceptibility rates among Staphylococcus aureus isolates from OPD and
  ward.

  Hence oral clindamycin and oral trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole remain
  very good options for purulent skin-soft tissue i nfections in OPD and
  ward patients.

[]

  Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF)

  Gram-negative isolates were more common among the isolated orga nisms
  from the CSF, indicating high representation of hospital acquired
  ventriculitis in the study population.

  Acinetobacter baumannii w as the most common organism followed by and
  Klebsiella pneumoniae and Pseudomonas aeruginos a.

  Most of these isolates were resistant to

  carbapenems, ceph alosporins and fluoroquinolones. Only colistin and
  minocycline showed promising susceptibility rates for Acinetobacter
  baumanni i and Klebsiella pneumoniae

[]

  9 AMR Surveillance Netw ork, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

Chapter 1: Summary of isolates distribution

Total number of culture positive isolates studied during the year 2022
was 1,07,053. Of these, 24,238 were from blood, 22,135 from urine,
20,508 superficial infections, 17,244 Lower Respiratory tract (LRT),
7000 Deep infections, 3396 Sterile sites (SS), 1364 CSF, 806 Faeces and
10362 others. Majority of the isolates were from Enterobacterales except
Salmonella and Shigella (49.2%) followed by Non fermenting Gram-negative
bacilli (NFGNB) (24.6%), staphylococci (14.7%), enterococci (6.5%),
fungi (3.0%), Typhoidal Salmonella (0.8%) and streptococci (0.4%) (Table
1.1).

In the distribution of major group of organisms in different specimens,
member of the Enterobacterales group were the commonest isolates in
urine (76.4%), sterile body fluids

(S) (56.9%), others (50.3%), deep infections (DI) (49.2%), superficial
    infections (SI) (43.6%), LRT (39.3%), blood (36.9%), and CSF
    (31.6%). Non fermenting Gram-negative bacilli (NFGNB) group were the
    predominant isolates in the lower respiratory tract (53.3%), CSF
    (41.2%), deep infection (DI) (26.6%), superficial infections (SI)
    (26.1%), sterile sites (SS) (21.8%), blood (17.8%), others (22.7%),
    and urine (8.7%). Staphylococci constituted 29.1 % of the blood
    infections followed the superficial infections (SI) (22.4%), deep
    infection (DI) (17.3%) and CSF (13.6%). Enterococci group
    constituted 11.3% isolates from urine followed by sterile body fluid
    (10.6%), CSF (8.7%), blood (6.9%), superficial infections (6.0%),
    and deep infections (5.1%), and Typhoidal Salmonella group
    constituted 3.3% of the isolates from blood. Yeast group were
    significant isolates in the blood infection (5.3%) (Table 1.1 and
    Figure 1.1).

The distribution of top 10 isolates from different specimens is
presented in Table 1.2 and Figure 1.2. Escherichia coli was most
commonly isolated (24.8%) followed by the Klebsiella pneumoniae (17.6%),
Pseudomonas aeruginosa (12.3%), Acinetobacter baumannii (11.3%) and
Staphylococcus aureus (8.7%). Among these isolates, Escherichia coli was
the most predominant isolate from the urine (53.2%), K. pneumoniae from
the LRT (25.1%), Pseudomonas aeruginosa from LRT (21.4%), Acinetobacter
baumannii from LRT (30.3%), S. aureus from SI (20.7%), Enterococcus
faecalis and Enterococcus faecium from urine (6.1%), and (4.2%)
respectively. The relative distribution of the various species isolated
from patients in the out-patient department (OPD), admitted to the wards
and intensive care unit (ICUs) are presented in Table 1.3 and Figures
1.3a &1.3b. Top 5 isolates in descending order in OPD specimen were E.
coli, K. pneumoniae, P. aeruginosa, S. aureus and Acinetobacter
baumannii; in wards E. coli, K. pneumoniae, P. aeruginosa, Acinetobacter
baumannii and S. aureus; and in ICU Acinetobacter baumannii, K.
pneumoniae, E. coli, P. aeruginosa and S. aureus. Enterococcus faecium
was common isolate from the ICU (3.7%) followed by ward and OPD;
whereas, E. faecalis was common isolate from the OPD (3.3%) followed by
the wards and the ICU. (Table 1.3, Figure 1.3).

[]

10. AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

  Table 1.1: Specimen wise distribution of major groups of organisms

[]

  Note:

1.  Blood includes: Blood from venepuncture, bloodfromcentral catheter,
      and blood from peripheral catheter.

2.  LRT (Lower Respiratory Tract) includes: BAL, sputum, lung aspirate,
      endotracheal aspirate (ETA) and lobectomy tissue (lung tissue).

3.  SSI (Superficial infection) includes: SST (skin & soft tissue),
      pus/exudate, wound swab, superficial biopsy and superficial
      tissue.

4.  Deep Infection includes: Abscess aspirate, pus aspirate, deep biopsy
      and deep tissue.

5.  SS (Sterile Sites) includes: Fluid from sterile spaces, abdominal
      fluid, intercostal tube fluid, pancreatic drain fluid, pericardial
      fluid, peritoneal fluid and pleural fluid.

[]

11. AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

[]

Figure 1.1: Specimen wise distribution of major groups of organisms

[]

12. AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

  Table 1.2: Top 10 isolates overall and their isolation rates from
  different specimens

[]

[]

13. AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

[]

Figure 1.2: Isolation distribution of top 10 isolates from different
specimens

[]

14. AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

  Table 1.3: Distribution of top 10 isolates from all specimens across
  OPD, ward and ICU

[]

[]

35

30

25

20

15

10

5

0

[] Total

[] OPD

[] Ward

[] ICU

  Figure 1.3: Distribution of top 10 isolates from all specimens across
  OPD, ward and ICU

[]

15. AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

  Yearly isolation rates of top ten isolates from all samples showed a
  steady increase of Klebsiella pneumoniae from 14.7% in 2017 to 17.6%
  in 2022 (Table 1.4, Figure 1.4) and A. baumannii from 7.7% in 2017 to
  11.3% in 2022 without much change in the isolation rates of the other
  species. There was also a decline in isolation rates of Staphylococcus
  aureus from 12.5% in 2017 to 8.7% in 2022.

  Table 1.4: Yearly isolation trends of top 10 isolates from all samples

[]

[]

16. AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

30.00%

[]

25.00%

20.00%

15.00%

10.00%

5.00%

  0.00%

Year 2017 Year 2018 Year 2019 Year 2020 Year 2021 Year 2022

  []Escherichia coli []Klebsiella pneumoniae []Pseudomonas aeruginosa

  []Acinetobacter baumannii []Staphylococcus aureus

Figure 1.4: Yearly isolation trends of top 5 isolates from all samples

Enterobacterales

Of the overall isolates Enterobacterales (except Salmonella and
Shigella) constituted a major group (49.2%) (Table 1.1). Out of a total
of 1,07,053 culture positive isolates, specimen percentage wise
distribution of major species within family Enterobacterales is shown in
the Table 1.5 and Figures 1.5. Overall, Escherichia coli was the
commonest species (24.8%) followed by Klebsiella pneumoniae (17.6%),
Enterobacter cloacae and Proteus mirabilis (1.6%) (Table 1.5).
Escherichia coli was the most predominant isolate from the urine
(53.2%), sterile site (31.6%), others (24.3%), Deep infections (20.9%),
superficial infection (19.8%), blood (16.1%) and CSF (10.5%). Klebsiella
pneumoniae was the most predominant isolate in the lower respiratory
tract (25.1%), others (18.3%), urine (17.2%), sterile sites (SS)
(17.1%), blood (16.3%), and deep infection (DI) (15.8%), CSF

(15.7%) and superficial infection (14.2%). Proteus mirabilis was common
in 4.1 % of deep and 3.1% of superficial infections and other specimens
(2.6%). Enterobacter cloacae constituted 3.3 % of deep infections and
2.3% of superficial infections and CSF (1.5%). Klebsiella species
constituted 1.2% of sterile site infections (SS).

Isolates from the regional centers (RC 14) had higher percentage isolate
rate of E. coli, RC 18 had higher percentage isolate rate of K.
pneumonaie. Rc 4 had higher percentage isolate rate of Proteus mirabilis
and Enterobacter cloacae than the rest of RCs (Table 1.6).

[]

17. AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

  Table 1.5: Specimen wise distributions of major species of Family
  Enterobacterales except Salmonella and Shigella

[]

[]

18. AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

  60

  50

(%) 40

Isolation 30

20

10

0

[]

Figure 1.5: Specimen wise distribution of major species of Family
Enterobacterales except Salmonella and Shigella

Table 1.6: Regional centre wise distribution of major species of family
Enterobacterales (except Salmonella) in all specimens (except faeces)

[]

[]

19. AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

[]

20. AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

Typhoidal Salmonella

This distribution showed that isolates from the RC 6 had higher
percentage isolate rate (12.7%) of Salmonella Typhi from blood than the
rest of RCs (Table 1.7). Salmonella Paratyphi A isolate percentage was
more in RC 10 (4.1) and in RC 6 (3.0%) as compared to other RCs. The
relative distribution of Typhoidal Salmonella isolated from blood in the
OPD, admitted to the wards and ICUs are presented in Table 1.8 and
Figures 1.6. Typhoidal Salmonella was common isolate from the OPD (8.7%)
followed by the wards and was least isolated from the ICU. (Table 1.8).
Among Typhoidal Salmonella, Salmonella Typhi had higher percentage
isolation rate than Salmonella Paratyphi A. Yearly isolation trends
showed that there is a decline in isolation rates of Salmonella Typhii n
2022 from the last five years from all over India (Table 1.9 & Figure
1.7).

Table 1.7: Isolates percentages across Regional Centres of Typhoidal
Salmonella isolated from blood

[]

[]

21. AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

[]

Table 1.8: Isolation Distribution of Typhoidal Salmonella from blood
location wise

[]

[]

  10

  9

[] Total

[] ICU

7

6

5

4

3

2

1

0

[] OPD

  Total Typhoidal Salmonella Salmonella

  Salmonella Typhi Paratyphi A

Figure 1.6: Location-wise Isolation pattern of Typhoidal Salmonella
isolated from blood across OPD, Ward and ICU

22

[]

22. AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

  Table 1.9: Yearly-isolation trend of Salmonella Typhi from blood
  across different regions

[]

[]

12

10

8

6

4

2

0

  2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 202

  []North []Central []East []West []South []National

  Figure 1.7: Yearly-isolation trends of Salmonella Typhi from blood
  across different regions

23

[]

23. AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

Non-fermenting Gram negative bacteria

Non-fermenting Gram-negative bacteria (NFGNB) constituted 24.6% of the
total isolates (26,352 out of 107053) (Table 1.10). Among the NFGNB,
Pseudomonas aeruginosa was the commonest isolate (12.4%) followed by
Acinetobacter baumannii (11.3%), Stenotrophomonas maltophilia and
Burkholderia cepacia accounted for 0.8% and 0.1% of all isolates
respectively. Pseudomonas aeruginosa was grossly predominant in LRT
(21.4%) followed by deep infections (17.5%), superficial infection
(16.1%), and others (14.2%). Acinetobacter baumannii was the predominant
isolate from CSF (31.2%) and LRT (30.3%) followed by SS (10.4%) and
blood (10.0%) (Table 1.10).

Regional center (RC) wise distribution showed that RC 11 had higher
percentage isolate rate of Acinetobacter baumannii and RC 3 had higher
percentage isolate rate of Pseudomonas aeruginosa than the rest of RCs
(Table 1.11). Among clinical settings, P. aeruginosa was predominantly
isolated in all ward, ICU and OPD (11.9-13.1%), while A. baumannii was
predominant in ICU (23.5%), followed by ward (10.7%) and OPD (4.7%)
respectively (Table 1.12a and Figure 1.8).

However, trend analysis over the years 2017 – 2022 has shown a stable
pattern in the isolation rates of P. aeruginosa from 12.4% to 12.4% in
2017 to 2022, respectively (Table 1.12b). In contrast, isolation rates
of A. baumannii increased from 7.7% to 11.4% between 2017 and 2022
respectively. No significant changes in the isolation rates of other
pathogens such as B. cepacia and S. maltophilia have been noted (Figure
1.9).

  24

[]

24. AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

  Table 1.10: Specimen wise distribution of NFGNB

[]

[]

25. AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

  Table 1.11: Isolates percentages across Regional Centres of
  Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Acinetobacter baumannii, Stenotrophomonas
  maltophilia and Burkholderia cepacia from all specimens (except
  Faeces)

[]

  26

[]

26. AMR surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

[]

  27

[]

27. AMR surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

  Table 1.12a: Location-wise isolates percentage of Pseudomonas
  aeruginosa, Acinetobacter baumannii, Stenotrophomonas maltophilia and
  Burkholderia cepacia from all samples across OPD, Ward and ICU

[]

[]

20

15

10

  5

  0

  Pseudomonas Acinetobacter Stenotrophomonas Burkholderia cepacia

  aeruginosa baumannii maltophilia

  Figure 1.8: Location-wise isolation pattern of A. baumannii, B.
  cepacia, P. aeruginosa, and S. maltophilia isolated from all samples

28

[]

28. AMR surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

  Table 1.12b: Yearly Isolation trend of P. aeruginosa, A. baumannii, S.
  maltophilia and B. cepacia isolated from all samples

[]

[]

14

12

10

8

6

4

2

0

  Figure 1.9: Yearly Isolation trend of P. aeruginosa, A. baumannii, S.
  maltophilia and B. cepacia isolated from all samples

[]

29. AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

Staphylococci

Staphylococci constituted 14.7% of the total isolates (Table 1.13).
Staphylococcus aureus was the predominant species in the blood (29.2%)
followed by superficial infections (22.4%), deep infections (17.3%),
others (14.4%), sterile body fluids (5.7%), LRT (3.8) and urine (1.5%)
(Table 1.13). Coagulase-negative staphylococci (CoNS) were the
predominant isolates in blood (21.8%) and CSF (8.6%) reflecting the high
incidence of shunt infections and intra vascular device associated
infections respectively. In blood and CSF, Staphylococcus epidermidis
isolation rate was 6.0% and 2.4% respectively, reflecting the ability of
the species to form biofilms and high incidence of shunt associated and
dialysis associated infections. Predominant percentage isolation of
methicillin resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) was from the
superficial infections (SI) 8.9%, followed by isolation from deep
infection (DI) 8.2% and 3.4% from blood. Methicillin sensitive
Staphylococcus aureus (MSSA) were the predominant isolates from the
superficial infection (SI) 11.6% followed by isolation from Deep
infections (DI) (7.3%) 6.4% and 3.9% from others and blood respectively
(Figure 1.10). Amongst the coagulase-negative staphylococci (CoNS), S.
haemolyticus (37.4%) were the commonest species followed by S.
epidermidis (28.0%) and S. hominis (23.2%) (Table1.13).

Regional centre wise distribution showed the predominance of isolation
of Staphylococcus aureus in RC15 (14.6%) with MRSA percentage isolation
(7.1%). The least percentage isolation of Staphylococcus aureus and MRSA
was found among RC 19 i.e., 4.1% and 2.6% respectively (Table 1.14).

Among clinical settings, Staphylococcus aureus was predominantly
isolated in OPD (12.4%), followed by ward (8.2%) and ICU (4.6%), while
the coagulase-negative staphylococci (CoNS) was predominant both in ward
and ICU (6.3%), then OPD (4.8%) (Table 1.15 and Figure 1.11). Trend
analysis over the years 2017 – 2022 have shown a steady decline in the
isolation rates of Staphylococcus aureus from 12.5% to 8.7% in 2017 to
2022 respectively (Table 1.16 and Figure 1.12).

[]

30. AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

  Table 1.13: Specimen wise relative distribution of S. aureus and CoNS
  species

[]

[]

31. AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

14

[]

  [] MSSA

[] MRSA

12

10

  8

  6

  4

  2

  0

  Figure1.10: Specimen wise relative distribution of MSSA and MRSA

[]

32. AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

  Table 1.14 Isolates percentages across Regional Centres of S. aureus,
  MRSA, MSSA and CoNS species isolated from all samples (Except Faeces)

[]

[]

33. AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

[]

34. AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

Table 1.15: Location-wise isolates percentage of S. aureus, MSSA, MRSA
and CoNS from all samples across OPD, Ward and ICU

[]

[]

14

12

10

8

6

4

2

0

Figure 1.11: Location-wise Isolation pattern of Staphylococcus aureus,
CoNS, MRSA, MSSA isolated from all samples

[]

35. AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

  Table 1.16: Yearly isolation trend of Staphylococcus species

[]

[]

14

12

10

8

6

4

2

0

  Year-2017 Year-2018 Year-2019 Year-2020 Year-2021 Year-2022

  []Staphylococcus aureus []Staphylococcus spp. []S. haemolyticus []S.
  epidermidis

  Figure 1.12 Yearly isolation trends of Staphylococcus species

[]

36. AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

  Enterococci

  Enterococci constituted overall 6.5% of all the isolates (Table 1.17).
  Among the Enterococcus species, E. faecalis and E. faecium accounted
  for 85% of all the total isolates, both E. faecalis (46.5%) and E.
  faecium (43.1%) were the predominant species. E. faecalis was more
  frequent in the urine (6.2%) and SI (3.4%) while E. faecium was
  relatively more frequent in the SS (6.1%) and CSF (4.8 %) (Table 1.17
  and Figure 1.13). Among clinical settings, E. faecalis were common
  isolates from the OPD (3.3%) and E. faecium from the ICU (3.7%) (Table
  1.18a). Regional centre wise distribution showed the predominance of
  isolation of E. faecalis in RC10 (7.3%) and E. faecium in RC18 (5.3%)
  (Table 1.18b).

  The trend analysis over the years have shown a stable trend in the
  isolation rates of E. faecium from 2.0% to 2.8% in 2017 to 2022 and in
  E. faecalis from 2.2% to 3.0% in 2017 to 2022 respectively (Table 1.19
  and Figure 1.14).

  Table 1.17: Specimen wise distribution of Enterococcus species

[]

[]

37. AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

7

[]

6

5

4

3

2

1

0

Figure 1.13: Specimen wise distribution of Enterococcus species

Table 1.18a. Location-wise isolation of Enterococcus faecalis,
Enterococcus faecium, Enterococcus spp. from all specimens (Except
Faeces)

[]

[]

38. AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

  Table 1.18b. Isolates percentages across Regional Centres of
  Enterococcus faecalis, Enterococcus faecium, Enterococcus spp. from
  all specimen (Except Faeces)

[]

[]

39. AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

  Table 1.19: Yearly isolation trend of Enterococcus species

[]

[]

3.5

  3

2.5

  2

1.5

  1

0.5

  0

  Year-2017 Year-2018 Year-2019 Year-2020 Year-2021 Year-2022

[]Enterococcus faecium []Enterococcus faecalis []Enterococcus spp.

  Figure 1.14 Yearly isolation trends of Enterococcus species

[]

40. AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

Fungal species

Total number of yeast isolates studied during the year 2022 was 2574, of
those 49.1% (1265) were isolated from blood. Majority of the isolates
were from Candida tropicalis (n=733) followed by Candida albicans
(n=719) (Table 1.20). In the distribution of fungi species in different
specimens, C. tropicalis was the predominant isolates in the blood
(1.5%), Candida albicans was also the predominant isolates in the others
(2.1%) followed by blood (0.9%) (Table 1.20). Among clinical settings,
in ICUs, C. tropicalis and were common isolates from the ICU (1.0%) and
C. albicans from the ward (0.75%) (Table 1.21 and Figure 1.15).

Yearly isolation trend showed that there is a steady decline in
isolation of C. tropicalis from 1.4% in 2017 to 0.6% in 2022. Yearly
isolation trend of Candida albicans showed a steady decline from 1.0% in
2017 to 0.6 in 2022. Both C. auris and C. parapsilosis isolates showed
an increased trend from 2017 to 2022 (Table 1.22 and Figure 1.16).

Among Aspergillus species, A. flavus was the predomiant isolates
followed by A. fumigates (Table 1.23).

[]

41. AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

  Table 1.20: Candida species isolated from different sample types
  except faeces

[]

1.  Percentages are out of particular specimen (column).

2.  Percentages in rows below Culture positive are out of Culture
      positive in respective columns.

3.  Blood includes: Blood-central catheter, Blood-peripheral and
      Peripheral catheter-blood.

4.  LRT (Lower Respiratory Tract) includes: BAL, Sputum, Lung aspirate,
      Endotracheal aspirate (ETA) and Lobectomy tissue (Lung tissue).

5.  Superficial Infection includes: SST (Skin & Soft Tissue),
      Pus/exudate, Wound swab, Superficial Biopsy and Superficial
      Tissue.

6.  Deep Infection includes: Abscess aspirate, Pus aspirate, Deep Biopsy
      and Deep Tissue.

7.  SS (Sterile sites) includes: Fluid from sterile spaces, abdominal
      fluid, Intracostal tube fluid, Pancreatic drain fluid, Pericardial
      fluid, Peritoneal fluid and Pleural fluid.

[]

42. AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

  Table 1.21: Candida species isolated from all samples across OPD, Ward
  and ICUs

[]

[]

  Candida Candida Candida Candida Candida Candida Candida

  tropicalis albicans glabrata parapsilosis auris pelliculosa krusei

  Figure 1.15: Location-wise pattern of Candida species isolated from
  all samples across OPD, Wards and ICUs.

[]

43. AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

  Table 1.22: Yearly trends for isolation of Candida species isolated
  from all samples

[]

[]

1.6

1.4

1.2

1

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0

  Year-2017 Year-2018 Year-2019 Year-2020 Year-2021 Year-2022

[]Candida tropicalis []Candida albicans []Candida glabrata

  []Candida parapsilosis []Candida auris

  Figure 1.16: Yearly trends for isolation of Candida species isolated
  from all samples

  Table 1.23: Isolation patterns of Aspergillus species from all
  specimens

[]

[]

44. AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

  Diarrheal pathogens

  A total of 670 diarrheal pathogen isolates were studied during the
  year 2022 which constituted 0.6% of total isolates (Table 1.1). The
  predominant species among diarrheal pathogens isolated from faeces
  sample identified was Escherichia coli Diarrheagenic (23.4%), followed
  by Aeromonas spp (20.3%), Salmonella spp Faecal (13.1%), Shigella
  (11.6%) and Vibrio spp. (4.8%) (Table 1.24). From non-faecal
  specimens, Aeromonas spp was isolated (n=16) and constituted 0.01% of
  total cultures (Table 1.25).

  Diarrheagenic pathogens were predominantly isolated from patients in
  OPD and wards (Table 1.26). Non Typhoidal Salmonella was mainly
  isolated in ward (26.7%) followed by ICU and OPD (12.4%). Escherichia
  coli Diarrheagenic was mainly isolated in OPD (38.6%) followed by ward
  (6%), while the Aeromonas spp was predominant in ward

  (28.2%), followed by OPD (10.4%) and ICU (Table 1.26 and Figure 1.17).
  Shigella flexneri was predominant in OPD and Vibrio cholerae in ward.
  The isolation trend over the period of five years (2017– 2022) showed
  a decreasing trend in the isolation of Aeromonas spp. whereas, the
  isolation trend of Non Typhoidal Salmonella showed an increasing trend
  from last year (Table 1.27 and Figure 1.18). The isolation trend of
  Vibrio spp showed an increasing trend from 2017 (4.8%) to 2021(8.9%)
  and decreasing trend from 2021 (8.9%) to 2022 (3.9%)

  Table 1.24: Isolation rates of faecal isolates from faeces samples

[]

[]

45. AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

  Table 1.25: Isolation rates of Diarrhoeagenic pathogens from
  non-faecal specimens

[]

  Table 1.26: Location-wise isolation pattern of top 5 faecal isolates
  isolated from faeces across OPD, Ward and ICU

[]

[]

  Figure 1.17: Location-wise isolation pattern of top 5 faecal isolates
  isolated from Faeces across OPD, Ward and ICU

[]

46. AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

  Table 1.27. Yearly Isolation trends of top 5 faecal isolates isolated
  from Faeces

[]

[]

40

35

30

25

20

15

10

5

0

  Year 2017 Year 2018 Year 2019 Year 2020 Year 2021 Year 2022

  Figure 1.18: Yearly Isolation trends of top 5 faecal isolates isolated
  from Faeces

[]

47. AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

  Streptococcus species

  Total number of Streptococcus isolates studied during the year 2022
  was 487, of those 1.8% were isolated from the upper respiratory tract.
  Majority of the isolates were from Streptococcus agalactiae (n=183)
  followed by Streptococcus pyogenes (n=156) and Streptococcus
  pneumoniae (n=144) (Table 1.28). Among clinical settings,
  Streptococcus isolates were common isolates from the OPD (0.7%)
  followed by ward and ICU (Table 1.29 and Figure 1.19).

  Table 1.28: Sample-wise Isolation pattern of Streptococcus species

[]

  Table 1.29: Location-wise Isolation pattern of Streptococcus isolated
  from all specimens across OPD, Ward and ICU

[]

[]

48. AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

[]

0.4

0.35

0.3

0.25

0.2

0.15

0.1

0.05

  0

[] Ward [] ICU

  Streptococcus Streptococcus Streptococcus Streptococcus

  agalactiae pyogenes pneumoniae viridans

Figure 1.19: Location wise Isolation of streptococcus species

[]

49. AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

  Chapter 2. Analysis of common syndromic isolates, their
  susceptibilities and implications in clnical practice

  This chapter includes the interpretation of antibiograms from
  OPD/Ward/ICU which is crucial for assessing the impact of
  antimicrobial resistance and its implications in clinical practice for
  empirical use of antibiotics. This further helps in identifying
  potential areas for interventions and improvements in antibiotic
  stewardship practices.

  Section A: Location wise distribution of isolates

  Distribution of isolates from total samples

  The distribution of top 5 isolates from OPD, ICU and ward from all
  specimens is presented in Table 2.1 and Figure 2.1. Among OPD,
  Escherichia coli was most commonly isolated (31.3%) followed by the
  Klebsiella pneumoniae (14.7%), Pseudomonas aeruginosa (13.1%),
  Staphylococcus aureus 12.4%) and Acinetobacter baumannii (4.7%). Among
  ward, again Escherichia coli was most commonly isolated (25.2%)
  followed by Klebsiella pneumoniae (17.8%), and Pseudomonas aeruginosa

  (11.9%). In ICU, A. baumannii was most commonly isolated (23.5%) %)
  followed by Klebsiella pneumoniae (21.5%) and E.coli (12.9%).

  Table 2.1: Top 5 isolates from all specimens

[]

[]

50. AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

[]

  Figure 2.1: Distribution of top 5 organisms form OPD, ward and ICU
  from total specimens

  Distribution of isolates from blood

  Among blood specimen, Escherichia coli was the most predominant
  isolate from both OPD(19.82%) and ward (17.5%), followed by K.
  pneumoniae and Staphylococcus haemolyticus , whereas K. pneumoniae
  (20.43%) was most common from ICU, followed by Acinetobacter baumannii
  and Escherichia coli (Table 2.2 ).

  Table 2.2: Top 5 isolates from blood

[]

[]

51. AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

  Distribution of isolates from urine

  Among urinary specimens, Escherichia coli was the most common organism
  isolated from OPD, Wards and ICU, followed by K. pneumoniae and
  Pseudomonas aeruginosa in all three places (Table 2.3).

  Table 2.3: Top 5 isolates from urine

[]

  Distribution of isolates from pus/exudates

  Staphylococcus aureus was the most common organism isolated from
  pus/exudate samples sent from OPD followed by Pseudomonas aeruginosa
  and Escherichia coli. From wards, Escherichia coli, was most common
  followed by Staphylococcus aureus. From ICUs, E. coli was most common
  followed by K. pneumoniae and Pseudomonas aeruginosa (Table 2.4).

  Table 2.4: Top 5 isolates from pus/exudates

[]

[]

52. AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

  Distribution of isolates from CSF

  Gram-negative isolates were more common among the isolated organisms
  from the CSF, indicating high representation of hospital acquired
  ventriculitis in the study population. Acinetobacter baumannii was the
  most common organism followed by and Klebsiella pneumoniae and E. coli
  (Table 2.5).

  Table 2.5: Top 5 isolates from CSF from all locations

[]

  Distribution of isolates from faeces

  Diarrhoeagenic Escherichia coli were the most common organism isolated
  from stool specimen from OPDs followed by Aeromonas and Salmonella
  spp. Salmonella and Aeromonas were also the most common from wards
  (Table 2.6).

  Table 2.6: Top 5 isolates from faeces

[]

[]

53. AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

  Section B: Specimen wise Antibiograms

  AMR Patterns from various specimens

  Resistance to 3rd Gen cephalosporins was very high among Gram-negative
  isolates (Escherichia coli, Klebsiella pneumoniae and Acinetobacter
  baumannii) from all the three loactions with exception of P.
  aeruginosa, in which susceptibility to ceftazidime was close to 80% in
  OPD isolates and close to 50% in ICU isolates.

  Amikacin showed good susceptibility rates among E. coli and P.
  aeruginosa isolates (close to 80%), but its susceptibility rates
  remained poor in Klebsiella pneumoniae and Acinetobacter baumannii.

  In Acinetobacter baumannii isolates, only Minocycline (> 60%) and
  colistin (>95%) showed good susceptibility rates.

  For carbapenems, E coli and P. aeruginosa isolates were fairly
  susceptible but carbapenem resistance rates were very high for
  Klebsiella pneumoniae and Acinetobacter baumannii even among OPD
  isolates.

  MRSA rates were close to 50% among ICU isolates whereas the same was
  close to 35% among OPD isolates. Antibiotics like TMP-SMX and
  clindamycin were fairly susceptible also vancomycin and linezolid
  showed good susceptibility rates of close to 100%.

  Ceftriaxone (96.1% susceptible), Cefixime (94 % susceptible),
  trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (92% susceptible) and azithromycin
  (97.4% susceptible) showed very good susceptibility patterns for
  Salmonella Typhi isolates. Fluoroquinolones show very poor
  susceptibility patterns (> 95% resistance) for Salmonella Typhi
  isolates.

  Antibiograms of stool samples, showed, high rates of resistance to
  fluoroquinolones; more than 90% isolates of Diarhogenic E. coli and
  Aeromonas spp. were resistant to fluoroquinolones. Among the tested
  isolates, trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole and azithromycin showed good
  susceptible rates to Salmonella spp., Diarhogenic E. coli and Shigella
  respectively.

  Most of these isolates were resistant to carbapenems, cephalosporins
  and fluoroquinolones. Only colistin and minocycline showed promising
  susceptibility rates for Acinetobacter baumannii and Klebsiella
  pneumoniae.

[]

54. AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

  The AMR patterns of top five pathogens identified in various specimens
  are depicted in tables.

  Blood

  Table 2.7: Susceptibility percentages of E. coli isolates from blood

[]

[]

[] OPD [] Ward

[] ICU

  Figure 2.2: Susceptibility pattern of E. coli from blood samples

[]

55. AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

  Table 2.8: % Susceptibility of Klebsiella pneumoniae isolates from
  blood

[]

120.00% _(Blood)

[]

100.00%

80.00%

60.00%

40.00%

20.00%

0.00%

[] OPD

[] Ward

[] ICU

  Figure 2.3: Susceptibility pattern of Klebsiella pneumoniae from blood
  samples

[]

56. AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

  Table 2.9: % Susceptibility of Acinetobacter baumannii isolates from
  blood

[]

[]

120.00%

100.00%

80.00%

60.00%

40.00%

20.00%

0.00%

[] OPD

[] Ward

[] ICU

  Figure 2.4: Susceptibility pattern of Acinetobacter baumannii from
  blood samples

[]

57. AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

  Table 2.10: % Susceptibility of P. aeruginosa isolates from blood

[]

[]

120.00%

100.00%

80.00%

60.00%

40.00%

20.00%

0.00%

[] OPD

[] Ward

[] ICU

  Figure 2.5: Susceptibility pattern of P. aeruginosa from blood samples

[]

58. AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

  Table 2.11: % Susceptibility of S. aureus isolates from blood

[]

[]

120.00%

100.00%

80.00%

60.00%

40.00%

20.00%

0.00%

[] OPD

[] Ward

[] ICU

  Figure 2.6: Susceptibility pattern of S. aureus from blood samples

[]

59. AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

  Table 2.12: % Susceptibility of Salmonella Typhi isolates from blood

[]

  AMA

  Ampicillin

  Azithromycin

  Cefixime

  Cefotaxime

  Ceftriaxone

  Chloramphenicol

  Ciprofloxacin

  Levofloxacin

  Trimethoprim-

  sulfamethoxazole

  Salmonella Typhi

[]

  [] OPD

  [] Ward

  Figure 2.7: Susceptibility pattern of Salmonella Typhi from blood
  samples

[]

60. AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

  Urine

  Table 2.13: % Susceptibility of E. coli isolates from urine

[]

[]

120.00%

100.00%

80.00%

60.00%

40.00%

20.00%

0.00%

[] OPD

[] Ward

[] ICU

  Figure 2.8: Susceptibility pattern of E. coli from urine

[]

61. AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

  Table 2.14:% Susceptibility of Klebseilla pneumoniae isolates from
  urine

[]

[]

120.00%

100.00%

80.00%

60.00%

40.00%

20.00%

0.00%

[] OPD

[] Ward

[] ICU

  Figure 2.9: Susceptibility pattern of Klebsiella pneumoniae from urine

[]

62. AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

  Table 2.15: % Susceptibility of Pseudomonas aeruginosa isolates from
  urine

[]

[]

120.00%

100.00%

80.00%

60.00%

40.00%

20.00%

0.00%

[] OPD

[] Ward

[] ICU

  Figure 2.10: Susceptibility pattern of Pseudomonas aeruginosa from
  urine

[]

63. AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

  Table 2.16: % Susceptibility of Enterococcus faecalis isolates from
  urine

[]

[]

120.00%

  [] OPD

  [] Ward

100.00%

  [] ICU

  80.00%

  60.00%

  40.00%

  20.00%

  0.00%

  Figure 2.11: Susceptibility pattern of Enterococcus faecalis from
  urine

[]

64. AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

  Table 2.17: % Susceptibility of Enterococcus faecium isolates from
  urine

[]

[]

100%

90%

80%

70%

60%

50%

40%

30%

20%

10%

0%

[] OPD

[] Ward

[] ICU

  Figure 2.12: Susceptibility pattern of Enterococcus faecium from urine

[]

65. AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

  Pus/Exudates

  Table 2.18: % Susceptibility of E.coli isolates from Pus/exudates

[]

120.00%

100.00%

80.00%

60.00%

40.00%

20.00%

0.00%

[] OPD

[]

[] Ward

[] ICU

  Figure 2.13: Susceptibility pattern of E. coli from Pus/exudates
  samples

[]

66. AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

  Table 2.19: % Susceptibility of S. aureus isolates from Pus/exudates

[]

[]

120.00%

100.00%

80.00%

60.00%

40.00%

20.00%

0.00%

[] OPD

[] Ward

[] ICU

  Figure 2.14: Susceptibility pattern of S. aureus from Pus/exudates
  samples

[]

67. AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

  Table 2.20 % Susceptibility of K. pneumoniae isolates from
  Pus/exudates

[]

[]

^(120.00%) Pus/Exudates

100.00%

  80.00%

  60.00%

  40.00%

  20.00%

  0.00%

[] OPD

[] Ward

[] ICU

  Figure 2.15: Susceptibility pattern of Klebsiella pneumoniae from
  Pus/exudates samples

[]

68. AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

  Table 2.21: % Susceptibility of A. baumannii isolates from
  Pus/exudates

[]

[]

  Figure 2.16: Susceptibility pattern of A. baumannii from Pus/exudates
  samples

[]

69. AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

  Table 2.22: % Susceptibility of P. aeruginosa isolates from
  Pus/exudates

[]

[]

120%

100%

80%

60%

40%

20%

0%

[] PUS OPD

[] PUS Ward

[] PUS ICU

  Figure 2.17: Susceptibility pattern of P. aeruginosa from Pus/exudates

[]

70. AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

  Faecal samples

  Table 2.23: % Susceptibility of Salmonella spp faecal isolates from
  faecal samples

[]

  Table 2.24: % Susceptibility of Aeromonas spp. isolates from faecal
  samples

[]

  Table 2.25: % Susceptibility of Escherichia coli Diarrhoeagenic
  isolates from faecal samples

[]

[]

71. AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

  Table 2.26: % Susceptibility of Shigella flexneri isolates from faecal

[]

  sulfamethoxazole

  Table 2.27: % Susceptibility of Salmonella Typhimurium Faecal isolates
  from faecal

[]

[]

72. AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

  Chapter 3. Enterobacterlaes

[]

  Species wise susceptibility of Enterobacterales isolated from all
  specimens except urine and faeces.

  In the year 2022, a total of 52692 significant clinical isolates
  belonging to various genera and species of family Enterobacterales
  from 21 participating centers were included in the analysis. The
  isolates belonged to various specimens including blood (8965), sterile
  body fluids including cerebrospinal fluid (431), pus (1935), wound
  swabsand aspirates (3446) and respiratory tract specimens (6780).

  Significant clinical isolates from all specimens (except urine and
  faeces) were tested for susceptibility to 10 antibiotics including
  aminoglycoside (amikacin), cephalosporins (cefotaxime and
  ceftazidime), fluoroquinolones (ciprofloxacin and levofloxacin), beta
  lactam and beta-lactamase inhibitor combination
  (piperacillin-tazobactam), carbapenems (imipenem, meropenem and
  ertapenem) and polymyxin (colistin). Susceptibility was tested
  following CLSI guidelines using disc diffusion or automated systems,
  except colistin where micro-broth dilution test was used.

  Susceptibilities of different species to the antibiotics are presented
  in table 3.1, figure 3.1 and figure 3.2. Colistin susceptibility
  (tested in recommended species) overall was 95% (marginally lower than
  previous 4 years); Citrobacter koseri showed 100% susceptibility
  followed by Klebsiella oxytoca (99%), and Escherichia coli (97%). K.
  pneumoniae and Enterobacter cloacae showed 94% and 92% susceptibility
  respectively.

  Table 3.1: Species wise susceptibility of Enterobacterales isolated
  from all specimens except urine and faeces

[]

* ‘n’ denotes the denominator

[]

73. AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

[]

Figure 3.1: Species wise susceptibility of Enterobacterales isolated
from of all specimens except urine and faeces.

[]

  Figure 3.2: Antibiotic wise susceptibility of species of
  Enterobacterales isolated from of all specimens except urine and
  faeces.

  Out of the carbapenems, overall, meropenem showed 60% susceptibility
  followed by ertapenem (56%) and imipenem (55%). M. morganii (86%), P.
  mirabilis (84%), and K. aerogenes (81%) showed highest susceptibility
  to meropenem followed by C. koseri (78%), Enterobacter spp. (78%), S.
  marcescens (77%), Citrobacter spp (74%), E. cloacae

  (72%), C. freundii (71%), and E. coli (70%). Least susceptibility was
  shown by K.

  pneumoniae (44%) and P. rettgeri (51%).

  Piperacillin-tazobactam susceptibility was overall 33% (significantly
  lower than last year). Maximum susceptibility was found in Proteus
  mirabilis (72%), Morganella morganii (68%), Citrobacter koseri (61%)
  and Serratia marcescens (53%). C. freundii,

[]

74. AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

  Citrobacter spp., E. cloacae, K. aerogenes, P. stuartii, and P.
  rettgeri showed susceptibilities between 40% and 50% with K.
  pneumoniae (22%) and E. coli (35%) showing the least.

  Overall, less than one fourth (21-24%) of isolates showed
  fluoroquinolone susceptibility. S. marcescens (64%) showed maximum
  susceptibility to levofloxacin followed by C. freundii, Enterobacter
  spp, K. aerogenes (59% each) and E. cloacae (51%). E. coli showed the
  lowest susceptibility to levofloxacin (16%). Ciprofloxacin and
  levofloxacin showed similar susceptibility for most species tested.

  Third generation cephalosporins, cefotaxime and ceftazidime showed
  comparable susceptibility of 24% of isolates overall. M. morganii
  (60%), C. koseri (55%), and S. marcescens (50%) showed susceptibility
  in half of the isolates or more. Overall, two thirds (63%) of the
  isolates were susceptible to amikacin. M. morganii (85%), followed by
  C. koseri (82%), K. aerogenes (79%), S. marcescens (78%), E. coli
  (77%), and E. cloacae (77%) showed better susceptibility than other
  species. K. pneumoniae (46%) showed the lowest susceptibility of all
  species tested.

  Comparison of susceptibility of isolates from OPD, ward and ICU

  Overall, for all drugs tested; Escherichia coli, Klebsiella
  pneumoniae, Citrobacter koseri and Enterobacter cloacae isolated from
  out-patients were more susceptible than those from in-patients and
  among in-patients, isolates from wards were more susceptible than
  those from ICU (Tables 3.2 to 3.5, Figures 3.3 to 3.6). The
  differences were more marked for E. coli, and K. pneumoniae and
  Enterobacter cloacae, and Citrobacter koseri.

  Table 3.2: Comparison of susceptibility of Escherichia coli isolated
  from OPD, ward and ICU

[]

  ‘n’ denotes the denominator

[]

75. AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

[]

  Figure 3.3: Comparison of susceptibility of Escherichia coli isolated
  from OPD, ward and ICU

  Table 3.3: Comparison of susceptibility of Klebsiella pneumonia
  isolated from OPD, ward and ICU

[]

  ‘n’ denotes the denominator

[]

76. AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

[]

  Figure 3.4: Comparison of susceptibility of Klebsiella pneumoniae
  isolated from OPD, ward and ICU

  Table 3.4: Comparison of susceptibility of Citrobacter koseri isolated
  from OPD, ward and ICU

[]

  ‘n’ denotes the denominator

[]

77. AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

[]

  Figure 3.5: Comparison of susceptibility of Citrobacter koseri
  isolated from OPD, ward and ICU

  Table 3.5: Comparison of susceptibility of Enterobacter cloacae
  isolated from OPD, ward and ICU

[]

  ‘n’ denotes the denominator

[]

78. AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

[]

  Figure 3.6: Comparison of susceptibility of Enterobacter cloacae
  isolated from OPD, ward and ICU

  Susceptibility trends of various species over time

  Over the last six years, imipenem susceptibility of E. coli dropped
  from 81% in 2017 to 66% in 2022 (table 3.6, figure 3.7) and that of
  Klebsiella pneumoniae dropped steadily from 59% in 2017 to 42% in 2022
  (table 3.7, figure 3.8). There has been a modest and inconsistent drop
  in meropenem susceptibility for both E. coli and K. pneumoniae. In
  contrast, meropenem susceptibility improved from 66% to 74% for
  Citrobacter spp and from 70% to 78% for Enterobacter spp over the last
  five years. There was an increase in susceptibility of Citrobacter
  species to amikacin from 67% in 2017 to 74% in 2022 (table 3.8, figure
  3.9). After an increase in susceptibility of Enterobacter species to
  ciprofloxacin from 53% in 2017 to 70% in 2021, it showed a steep fall
  to 52% in 2022 (Table 3.9, Figure 3.10). Susceptibility to other
  antibiotics didn’t show much change over the last six years.

[]

79. AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

Table 3.6: Yearly susceptibility trend of E. coli isolated from all
samples (except faeces and urine)

[]

[]

90

80

70

60

50

40

30

20

10

0

Figure 3.7: Yearly susceptibility trend of E. coli isolated from all
samples (except faeces and urine)

[]

80. AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

  Table 3.7: Yearly susceptibility trend of Klebsiella pneumonia
  isolated from all samples (except faeces and urine)

[]

70

[]

60

50

40

30

20

10

0

  Figure 3.8: Yearly susceptibility trend of Klebsiella pneumonia
  isolated from all samples (except faeces and urine)

[]

81. AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

  Table 3.8: Yearly susceptibility trend of Citrobacter species isolated
  from all samples (except faeces and urine)

[]

[]

80

70

60

50

40

30

20

10

0

  Year 2017 Year 2018 Year 2019 Year 2020 Year 2021 Year 2022

  []Amikacin []Ceftazidime

  []Ciprofloxacin []Piperacillin-tazobactam

  Figure 3.9: Yearly susceptibility trend of Citrobacter species
  isolated from all samples (except faeces and urine)

[]

82. AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

  Table 3.9: Yearly susceptibility trend of Enterobacter species
  isolated from all samples (except faeces and urine)

[]

[]

90

80

70

60

50

40

30

20

10

  Figure 3.10: Yearly susceptibility trend of Enterobacter species
  isolated from all samples (except faeces and urine)

[]

83. AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

  Relative susceptibilities of carbapenem susceptible and carbapenem
  resistant isolates of E. coli and K. pneumoniae

  Overall, carbapenem susceptible isolates showed higher susceptibility
  to all the antibiotics tested, than carbapenem resistant (resistant to
  at least one of the carbapenems tested) isolates (table 3.10 and
  figure 3.11). The difference was more marked in K. pneumoniae than E.
  coli indicating that carbapenem resistant K. pneumoniae isolates were
  more resistant to all the antibiotics than carbapenem resistant E.
  coli isolates. In E. coli, the differences in susceptibility were high
  for carbapenems and amikacin (range of differences 40-89%) and
  moderate for other antibiotics (range of differences 13-39%). In K.
  pneumoniae, the differences were high for all the antibiotics tested
  (range of differences 29-97%).

  Table 3.10: Susceptibilities of carbapenem susceptible (CS) and
  carbapenem resistant (CR) isolates of E. coli and K. pneumoniae to all
  antibiotics

[]

  Figure 3.11: Susceptibilities of carbapenem susceptible (CS) and
  carbapenem resistant (CR) isolates of E. coli and K. pneumoniae to all
  antibiotics

[]

84. AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

  Analysis of results from individual Regional Centers

  21 Regional Centers (RCs) from various parts of the country, both
  public and private sectors, participated in surveillance. The results
  of all centers for the designated organisms and the designated
  antibiotics were used for overall susceptibility but only those
  drug-pathogen combinations where the number tested was 30 or more were
  used for RC wise analyses. The susceptibility profiles showed
  considerable variation between the RCs.

  Species wise susceptibility of Enterobacterales isolated from urine

  Fosfomycin showed 97% susceptibility to E. coli isolated from urine
  (Table 3.11 and figure 3.12 and 3.13). Overall, the isolates from
  urine showed good susceptibility to amikacin (79%), meropenem (76%),
  nitrofurantoin (76%), imipenem (72%) and ertapenem (69%), followed by
  and piperacillin-tazobactam (52%). Species wise, C. koseri was the
  most susceptible followed by E. cloacae and M. morganii. P. rettgeri
  was the least susceptible showing susceptibility of 40 percent or less
  to all antibiotics tested except imipenem (61%). Comparison of overall
  susceptibilities of urinary isolates and non-urinary isolates of
  Enterobacterales showed marginally better susceptibility in the former
  (Figure 3.14).

  Table 3.11: Susceptibility of species of Enterobacterales isolated
  from urine to antibiotics, overall and species wise

[]

85. AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

[]

  Figure 3.12: Susceptibility of Enterobacterales isolated from urine,
  antibiotic wise

[]

  Figure 3.13: Susceptibility of Enterobacterales isolated from urine,
  overall and species wise

[]

86. AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

[]

  Figure 3.14: Overall susceptibility of non-urinary versus urinary
  isolates of Enterobacterales to the common antibiotics tested

  Comparison of susceptibilities of E. coli and K. pneumoniae showed
  that the former is more susceptible than the latter to all antibiotics
  except cefazolin and fluoroquinolones (table 3.12 and figure 3.15).

  Table 3.12: Comparison of susceptibility of E. coli and K. pneumoniae
  from urine

[]

87. AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

[]

Figure 3.15: Comparison of susceptibility of E. coli and K. pneumoniae
from urine

  RC wise susceptibility of E. coli and K. pneumoniae showed similar
  variations as the non-urine isolates except in E. coli for fosfomycin
  and nitrofurantoin. RC 21 showed unusually low susceptibility for most
  antibiotics tested (Table 3.13 and 3.14).

  Table 3.13: Susceptibility of E. coli isolated from urine, overall and
  RC wise

[]

88. AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

  Table 3.14: Susceptibility of K. pneumoniae isolated from urine,
  overall and RC wise

[]

  Clinical relevance

  The relative frequency of isolation of various species and their
  susceptibility trends has an important role in deciding empiric
  antibiotic policies in hospitals. The trends of change in
  susceptibility indicate behavior of organisms over time and alert us
  to take appropriate preventive measures.

  Colistin, as expected, was the most effective antibiotic with an
  overall susceptibility of near 95% with most species tested except
  Citrobacter species (80%) and Enterobacter species (86%). With
  increasing use over the last five years, colistin resistance is
  emerging and the recent removal by CLSI of susceptible category from
  colistin indicates that there are strains of organisms without any
  detectable resistance mechanism (wild strains) which may not respond
  to therapy with this drug. Systemic therapy with colistin has also
  been mentioned as not adequate for treating respiratory tract
  infections. The fact that, in tertiary care facilities, many isolates
  from hospital-acquired and ventilator-associated pneumonias are
  carbapenem resistant, colistin therapy, if required, should be
  supplemented with nebulized colistin through inhalation. The removal
  of susceptible category from colistin also indicates that, in all
  situations, therapy with colistin may have unpredictable outcome and
  therefore should be highly restricted.

  Carbapenem (meropenem) resistance was very high in Klebsiella
  pneumoniae (44%), P. rettgeri (51%), and K. oxytoca (56%), with an
  overall all-species susceptibility of 60%. Carbapenems have been
  mainstay in empiric therapy in tertiary care ICU settings. Though
  there was good susceptibility in M. morganii (86%), P. mirabilis
  (84%), and K. aerogenes (81%), the efficacy of this drug as empiric
  therapy protocol should depend on relative distribution of the various
  species in a particular set up. This also demands

[]

89. AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

  regular surveillance of carbapenem resistant Enterobacterales by
  molecular detection of various genes.

  Piperacillin-tazobactam susceptibility overall was alarmingly low at
  33%. Though the drug showed reasonable susceptibility in Proteus
  mirabilis (72%), M. morganii (68%), and Citrobacter koseri (61%), it
  showed poor susceptibility in commonly isolated species like
  Klebsiella pneumoniae (22%) and E. coli (35%) and therefore should be
  used only when an isolate is tested susceptible. Third generation
  cephalosporins and fluoroquinolones have susceptibilities far below
  the level to consider them appropriate for use in serious patients.
  Extensive use and abuse of these two groups over the last three
  decades have resulted in high prevalence of extended-spectrum beta
  lactamases and carbapenemases against oxyimino-cephalosporins and
  multiple mutations in organisms against fluoroquinolones making them
  nearly unusable as empiric therapy in seriously ill patients in
  tertiary care practices.

  Amongst the urinary isolates, phosphomycin showed the highest
  susceptibility (97%) in E. coli, the commonest species and the one for
  which it is recommended by CLSI. The urinary isolates showed
  marginally better susceptibility than non-urinary isolates to most
  antibiotics and this fact combined with the concentrating effect of
  urine on many antibiotics should be considered while treating such
  infections.

  The differences in susceptibility of various organisms isolated from
  patients in OPD, indoor wards and ICU practices are clearly an outcome
  of the extent of use of the antibiotics in these areas and the
  consequent selection pressure. While OPD patients are usually put on
  oral antibiotics, the indoor patients are frequently on parenteral
  antibiotics and the ICU patients are usually exposed to the highest
  and broad-spectrum antibiotics, often multiple.

  Resistance of an organism to an antibiotic is a direct outcome of the
  frequency of isolation of the organism and the selection pressure of
  the antibiotic load used to treat it. Over the last two decades, use
  of carbapenems have increased many folds and the same is reflected in
  imipenem susceptibility of E. coli dropping steadily from 81% in 2017
  to 66% in 2022 and that of Klebsiella pneumoniae dropping steadily
  from 59% in 2017 to 42% in 2022. The increase in susceptibility to
  amikacin in Citrobacter species and meropenem in Citrobacter and
  Enterobacter speciesmay reflect drop in use of the same for these
  organisms.

  Characterisation of resistance mechanism

  E. coli

  A total of seven hundred and sixteen (716) E. coli isolates were
  subjected to four multiplex PCRs and three monoplex PCRs for OXA-48,
  CTXM-15 and NDM. Overall, CTXM-15 (34%) was the most common, followed
  by OXA-1 (28%), CTXM-1 and NDM-1 (19% each), TEM and OXA-48 (17%
  each), IMP (12%), VIM and SHV (9% each) and KPC (3%) (Figures 3.16,
  Figure 3.17 and Table 3.15). The E. coli isolates received from RC1
  were positive for CTXM-15 (55%) followed by NDM-1 (43%) and CTXM-1
  gene (34%).

[]

90. AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

  The isolates from RC2 showed maximum positivity for CTXM-15 (24%),
  followed by TEM (12%), NDM and OXA-1 (10% each) and OXA-48, SHV,
  CTXM-1 less than 10%. The majority of RC3 isolates were positive for
  IMP (80%) and CTXM-15 (73%) followed by OXA-1 (47%) and CTXM-1 (33%).

  The RC4 isolates were majorly positive for CTXM-1 (23%) followed by
  NDM (19%) and OXA-1 (11%). RC5 isolates showed OXA-1 (43%) followed by
  SHV (35%), CTX-M15 (35%) and CTXM-1 (29%). RC6 isolates showed
  CTXM-15(67%) followed by SHV and IMP (33% each). The RC7 isolates were
  positive for OXA-1 (21%), CTXM-15 (17%), and TEM (14%). In RC8, OXA-1
  was detected in 41% isolates and CTXM-15 and CTXM-1 were detected in
  39% of the isolates. RC9 showed high positivity for OXA-1 (67%) and
  CTXM-1 (45%). RC12 isolates were maximally positive for OXA-48 (67%),
  followed by TEM (42%), NDM (41%), CTXM-15 (32%) and OXA-1 (27%). The
  RC13 isolates showed positivity for CTXM-15 (40%), OXA-1 (30%), TEM
  and NDM (19% each) and rest genes showed lesser prevalence (less than
  10%). In RC14 isolates, CTXM-15 and VIM were the commonest (53% and
  43% respectively) followed by NDM (24%). In RC15 samples, CTXM-15
  (57%) and IMP (51%) had the highest prevalence followed by OXA-1(35%).
  Among the RC16 samples, the CTXM-15 resistance gene was found in 26%
  of cases; while OXA-1 resistance gene was present in 15% isolates and
  the rest of the genes had low prevalence. In the RC17 samples, OXA-1
  had the highest prevalence at 100%, followed by CTXM-15 and NDM at
  67%, other resistance genes, such as IMP and CTXM-1, had a prevalence
  of 33% each. The predominant resistance genes in RC18 samples were
  OXA-48 (33%), TEM and OXA-1, with a prevalence of 23% each; IMP and
  NDM were also present in 12% and 16% of the samples, respectively. The
  least prevalence resistance genes (less than 10%) were found in RC19
  samples. RC21 isolates showed higher prevalence of CTXM-15 (46%)
  followed by CTXM-1 (43%), TEM and NDM (27% each). The OXA-48, OXA-19
  and VIM were found in 19% of isolates whereas 24% carried IMP genes.

  As per figure 2, in E. coli isolates, CTXM-15 gene was the predominant
  gene present in 34% of the isolates followed by OXA-1 in 28% of the
  isolates and NDM and CTXM-1 in 19% of the isolates. The genes encoding
  for AmpC β-lactamases were the least prevalent genes.

[]

91. AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

[]

  Figure 3.16: Various resistance genes found in E. coli isolates from
  different regional centres across India

92. AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Co uncil of Medical Research, 2022

[]

  Figure 3.17: Percentage positivity of AMR associated genetic
  determinants in E. coli

  Table 3.15: Percentage positivity of resistant genes in E. coli from
  each centre

[]

[]

93. AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

  K. pneumoniae

  A total of five hundred and fifty-six (556) K. pneumoniae isolates
  were subjected to four multiplex PCRs and three monoplex PCRs for
  OXA-48, CTXM-15 and NDM. Overall, SHV gene was the predominant present
  in 49% of the isolates followed by CTXM-15 in 34%, OXA-48 in 31%,
  OXA-1 in 22%, CTXM-1in 23%, NDM in 19%, TEM in 18%, VIM and IMP in 6%
  each and KPC in 5% of the isolates (Figure 3.18, Figure 3.19 and Table
  3.16). Among the RC1 isolates, the most prevalent resistance genes
  were CTXM-15 (72%), followed by SHV (63%), OXA-48 (61%) and CTXM-1
  (43%). The isolates from RC2 showed maximum positivity for CTXM-15
  (39%), followed by OXA-48 (31%), TEM (16%) and CTXM-1 less than 10%.
  In the RC3 samples, SHV had the highest prevalence at 80%, followed by
  KPC (53%) and CTXM-15 (47%) and CTXM-1 (33%). The RC4 isolates were
  majorly positive for SHV (67%) followed by CTXM-1 (27%) and TEM (25%).
  Within RC5 isolates, SHV (74%) was the predominant resistance gene
  followed by CTXM-1 (41%), and OXA-1 and CTXM-15 (29% each). RC6
  samples exhibited high prevalence for CTXM-15 (67%) and OXA-1 (42%).
  Additionally, SHV and OXA-48 were present at 38% and 33% isolates
  respectively. The RC7 isolates were positive only for SHV (71%). Among
  the RC8 isolates, SHV (80%), OXA-48 (52%) and CTXM-1 (36%) were the
  most prevalent resistance genes. The RC9 samples showed high
  prevalence of SHV (93%) and NDM (39%). The RC10 isolates were positive
  for TEM (100%) and, SHV and CTXM-15 (50% each). The RC12 isolates
  showed maximum positivity for SHV (53%), OXA-48 (49%), CTXM-15 (34%),
  TEM and OXA-1 (31% each), and NDM (29%). Within RC13 isolates had
  lesser genes; NDM (33%) and CTXM-15 (27%) being the most prevalent
  resistance genes. RC14 samples exhibited high prevalence of SHV (62%)
  and CTXM-15 (41%). Other resistance genes were present at lower levels
  or absent. Among the RC15 isolates, CTXM-15 (82%) and SHV (76%) were
  the most common resistance genes. Other genes, like OXA-1 (47%) and
  IMP (41%), were also commonly detected. In RC16 samples, CTXM-15 (33%)
  and SHV (24%) were prevalent, while other resistance genes had
  prevalence rates less than 10%. The RC18 samples showed varying
  prevalence for different resistance genes, with OXA-48 (36%), NDM
  (33%) and IMP (21%) being notable. Others like VIM, KPC and OXA-1 were
  detected at lower levels (lesser than 10%). Within RC19 isolates,
  overall lower prevalence of resistance genes was found and SHV (16%)
  and CTXM-15 (11%) were the most prevalent. In RC21, 50% of the
  isolates showed the presence of OXA-48, followed by CTXM-15 in 47% of
  the isolates and CTXM-1 in 42% and SHV in 37% of the isolates. In RC10
  (n=2), both the isolates were positive for TEM-1, whereas one strain
  was positive for CTXM-15 and SHV each.

  As per figure 3.19, in K. pneumoniae isolates, SHV gene was the
  predominant gene present in 49% of the isolates followed by CTXM-15 in
  34% of the isolates and OXA-48 in 31% of the isolates. The genes
  encoding for AmpC β-lactamases were the least prevalent genes.

[]

94. AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

[]

Figure 3.18: Various resistanc e genes found in K. pneumoniae isolates
from different regional c entres across India

95. AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Co uncil of Medical Research, 2022

[]

  Figure 3.19: Percentage positivity of AMR associated genetic
  determinants in K. pneumoniae

  Table 3.16: Percentage positivity of resistant genes in K. pneumoniae
  from each centre

[]

[]

96. AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

  The comparison between the E. coli (n= 716) and K. pneumoniae (n=556)
  isolates received from regional centres (n= 19) in 2022 revealed the
  presence of resistance genes more in Klebsiella isolates than E. coli
  (Figure 3.20).

[]

Percentage prevalence of resistance genes

60.00

50.00

40.00

30.00

20.00

10.00

0.00

  Figure 3.20: Comparison of resistance genes present in E. coli and K.
  pneumoniae isolates from regional centres across India

[]

97. AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

  Chapter 4. Typhoidal Salmonella

  Typhoid fever poses a significant health burden in developing nations,
  leading to high rates of illness and death. The problem is exacerbated
  by the increasing resistance to antibiotics, which complicates the
  treatment of this disease.

  Accurate diagnosis and timely administration of appropriate
  antibiotics are crucial for effective treatment. The impact of typhoid
  fever on individuals and communities is profound. However, diagnosing
  typhoid fever is challenging because its symptoms are similar to those
  of other febrile illnesses. To determine the most effective treatment,
  it is essential to rely on culture and susceptibility test results.
  Understanding the history of antibiotic resistance reveals that the
  introduction of antibiotics has led to a gradual acquisition of
  resistance. Initially, multidrug-resistant strains (resistant to
  chloramphenicol, ampicillin, and co-trimoxazole) emerged, leading to
  fluoroquinolones being designated as the first-line drugs.

  Presently, third-generation cephalosporins and azithromycin are the
  available treatment options for multidrug-resistant and
  fluoroquinolone-resistant typhoid fever. However, recent outbreaks of
  extensively drug-resistant (XDR) strains in Asian countries have
  severely limited these treatment choices. The emergence of these
  extensively drug-resistant typhoidal Salmonellae poses a global
  threat. Therefore, continuous surveillance and focused attention are
  required to prevent their spread. With the elimination of geographical
  boundaries due to travel and the dissemination of drug-resistant
  isolates, addressing this issue has become more crucial than ever.

  Overall, Salmonella Typhi, commonly referred to as S. Typhi, is the
  primary causes of typhoid fever in India, followed by Salmonella
  Paratyphi A (S. Paratyphi A). In 2017, the highest isolation rate was
  observed in West India (4.8%), however, in 2018, there was a shift in
  the highest isolation rate, which moved to Central India with a
  significant increase to 10.9%. In 2019, the maximum isolation of S.
  Typhi was once again observed in West India, but the rate had slightly
  increased to 5.9%. The year 2020, which coincided with the COVID-19
  pandemic, saw the highest isolations of S. Typhi reported from West
  India, constituting 6.2% of the cases. This period may have been
  influenced by various factors related to the pandemic, impacting
  disease prevalence. In 2021, Central India experienced the highest
  isolation rate of S. Typhi at 2.5%, marking a shift from the previous
  years' trends. Finally, in 2022, the maximum isolation was recorded in
  North India, indicating a change in the distribution pattern once
  again.

  A total of 702 typhoidal Salmonellae cases were reported across India
  in 2022 (Table 4.1). Among them, 584 cases were positive for
  Salmonella Typhi, while 118 cases were positive for Salmonella
  Paratyphi A. The antimicrobial susceptibility results for Salmonella
  Typhi revealed that 94% of isolates were susceptible to ampicillin,
  93% were susceptible to trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole, and 95% were
  susceptible to chloramphenicol. Additionally, 3rd generation
  cephalosporins exhibited a susceptibility rate of 94% in 2022, whereas
  fluoroquinolones showed a susceptibility rate of only 3%.

[]

98. AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

  Azithromycin, on the other hand, exhibited a susceptibility rate of
  97% during the same period.

  Table 4.1: Susceptibility pattern of Salmonella species from blood

[]

  *Azithromycin sensitivity cut off values are not given in CLSI for
  Salmonella Paratyphi A

  Salmonella Paratyphi A exhibited high susceptibility rates to various
  antimicrobial agents in 2022. Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole
  demonstrated a susceptibility rate of 99%, chloramphenicol had 98%,
  and ampicillin showed a rate of 97%. Additionally, 3rd generation
  cephalosporins were effective against Salmonella Paratyphi A with a
  susceptibility rate of 97%. However, susceptibility to ciprofloxacin,
  a fluoroquinolone, was notably low at only 1% during the same period.
  These findings highlight the antimicrobial resistance patterns of
  Salmonella Paratyphi A and emphasize the limited effectiveness of
  ciprofloxacin in treating infections caused by this pathogen.

  Salmonella Typhi

  The susceptibility data reveals the sensitivity patterns of various
  antimicrobial agents against Salmonella Typhi in different regions of
  India (Table 4.2). In the South region, ampicillin exhibited a
  susceptibility rate of 86%, while in the North region; it was 90%. The
  West region reported 92% susceptibility, and across India the overall
  susceptibility rate was 94%. For trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole, the
  West region showed 94% susceptibility, the South region had a rate of
  (26/26), the North region had a rate of 92%. Across India,
  Chloramphenicol demonstrated a susceptibility rate of 95%, in the West
  region it was 88.2% while in the South region it was 96% and 96.8% in
  the North region. The susceptibility patterns of cephalosporins varied
  across different regions of India. Ceftriaxone displayed a
  susceptibility rate of 93.8% nationwide, with six resistant

[]

99. AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

  strains identified in the South region. However, all S. Typhi isolates
  from the North and Central regions exhibited 97.9% and 95.4%
  susceptibility followed by 89.9% susceptibility from West and (25/28)
  East. Azithromycin, on the other hand, demonstrated 100%
  susceptibility in the North, and Central, it was (21/26) from South
  and 94% West region.

  Ciprofloxacin susceptibility was found to be (2/27) in the South
  region and (8/184) in the West region. Across India, the overall
  ciprofloxacin susceptibility rate was 3%. The observed findings
  underscore the significance of regional disparities in antimicrobial
  susceptibility patterns, emphasizing the emergence of resistance,
  especially in cephalosporins and fluoroquinolones. Accurate
  understanding of these trends plays a crucial role in guiding
  effective treatment approaches and facilitating surveillance measures
  to address antimicrobial resistance in Salmonella Typhi infections.

  Table 4.2: Susceptibility pattern of S. Typhi from Blood across
  different regions of India

[]

  Table 4.3 and Fig. 4.1 represent yearly susceptibility trends of
  Salmonella Typhi isolated from blood. Antimicrobial susceptibility for
  ampicillin in S. Typhi has increased from 91.9% in 2017 to 94% in
  2022. Chloramphenicol susceptibility has increased initially from 2017
  to 2020 and then followed by a slight decrease in 2021, where
  susceptibility was reported 95.7% and 94.7% in 2022.
  Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole susceptibility was 94.4% in 2017 and 96%
  in 2020- 2021 and further decreased to 92.9% in 2022. Ceftriaxone and
  cefixime susceptibility were found to be consistent for 5 years i.e.
  from 98.5% to 99.5% in 2021. During 2022, susceptibility to 3rd
  generation cephalosporin has decreased in comparison to previous
  years. It was 93.8% for ceftriaxone and 94.5% for cefixime.
  Ciprofloxacin sensitivity has decreased from 11.6% in 2017 to 3% in
  2022.

[]

100. AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

  Table 4.3: Yearly susceptibility trends of S. Typhi from Blood

[]

[]

120

100

80

60

40

20

0

  []Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole

  Figure 4.1: Yearly susceptibility trends of S. Typhi from blood

  To analyse the changing trend of ciprofloxacin minimum inhibitory
  concentration (MIC) over a period of 9 years, the data was categorized
  into two groups: 2014-2016 and 2017-2019. Additionally, the individual
  years of 2020, 2021, and 2022 were examined independently, as shown in
  Figure 4.2. This division allowed for a more detailed understanding of
  any variations in ciprofloxacin MIC values over time. Notably, the
  minimum MIC value (ranging from 0.016 µg/ml to 0.047 µg/ml) was not
  reported in the strains isolated between 2014 and 2019. However, this
  minimum MIC value was observed in the strains isolated in 2020.
  Furthermore, the maximum MIC range of 256

[]

101. AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

  µg/ml was reported from 2020 onwards. It is important to highlight
  that the number of strains exhibiting higher MIC values has increased
  in both 2021 and 2022, indicating a potential shift towards reduced
  susceptibility to ciprofloxacin in recent years.

  Although the majority of S. Typhi isolates showed intermediate
  sensitivity to ciprofloxacin in the years 2014-2016 (45/77, 58%) and
  2017-2019 (113/160, 71%), these were considered as resistant,
  resulting in a total ciprofloxacin resistance of 92% (71/77) and 93%
  (149/160) respectively for those periods. In 2020, the resistance rate
  increased significantly, with 191/194 (98.4%) typhoidal Salmonella
  isolates showing resistance to ciprofloxacin. In 2021, 168/263 (63.8%)
  isolates exhibited intermediate sensitivity, and 66/263 (25%) were
  classified as resistant, resulting in a total ciprofloxacin resistance
  of 88.9% (234/263). Notably, there has been a slight increase of 10%
  in ciprofloxacin susceptibility during this period.

  When comparing the data from 2022 to previous years, a significant
  rise in ciprofloxacin non-susceptibility was observed. In comparison
  to 2021, there was a decrease in ciprofloxacin susceptibility of 1.4%
  (5/344) among the isolates. The majority of isolates, 70.3% (242/344),
  exhibited intermediate MIC, indicating reduced effectiveness of
  ciprofloxacin. Additionally, 28% (97/344) of the isolates were
  classified as non-susceptible to ciprofloxacin, indicating high levels
  of resistance.

  In order to examine the trend of ceftriaxone creeping minimum
  inhibitory concentration (MIC) over a 9-year period, the data was
  divided into two groups for 6 years: 2014-2016 and 2017-2019 and the
  individual years of 2020, 2021, and 2022 were analysed separately for
  any recent change (Fig 4.3). During the period of 2014-2016, maximum
  number of isolates showed a minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC)
  range of 0.032-0.064 µg/ml. An equal number of isolates exhibited an
  MIC range of 0.125-0.19 µg/ml, with a slight increase in isolates
  having an MIC of 0.25 µg/ml followed by five ceftriaxone resistant
  Salmonella Typhi reported in 2016 from hospital from, Mumbai. In the
  subsequent period of 2017-2019, a similar pattern was observed,
  although there was a slight decrease in the number of isolates with an
  MIC of 0.19 µg/ml and an increase in isolates with an MIC of 0.25
  µg/ml. Three ceftriaxone resistant isolates were observed during 2018
  and 2019. In 2020, a notable shift occurred in the distribution of
  isolates with higher MIC values compared to previous years. The
  majority of isolates exhibited an MIC range of 0.064 µg/ml to 0.25
  µg/ml. None of the ceftriaxone resistant isolate was observed during
  2020 and 2021. However, in the following years (2021 and 2022) there
  was a reversal in this trend, with a shift towards lower MIC values.
  The maximum number of isolates fell within the range of 0.032-0.064
  µg/ml MIC. It is worth noting that in 2022, three isolates were
  reported as resistant to ceftriaxone.

  These findings suggest a fluctuation in the MIC values of ceftriaxone
  over the years, with a notable shift towards higher MIC values in 2020
  and a subsequent return to lower MIC values in 2021 and 2022. The
  emergence of ceftriaxone-resistant isolates during the study period
  highlights the need for continued monitoring of antimicrobial
  resistance patterns in Salmonella Typhi infections.

[]

102. AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

  To understand the trend of Azithromycin MIC over a 9-year period, the
  data was divided into two groups: 2014-2016 and 2017-2019.
  Additionally, the individual years of 2020, 2021, and 2022 were
  analysed separately (Fig. 4.4) for any recent change. In the years
  2014-2016 and 2017-2019, the majority of isolates showed a maximum
  concentration (MIC) range of 2-4 µg/ml. However, in the subsequent
  years, there was a shift in the distribution, with the maximum number
  of isolates falling in the 4-16 µg/ml MIC range. Notably, in 2020 and
  2021, there were reports of isolates with a MIC range of 32 µg/ml.
  While the majority of strains exhibited MIC values ranging from 3
  µg/ml to 16 µg/ml, there has also been an emergence of strains with
  higher MIC values. These findings indicate a changing pattern of
  azithromycin susceptibility, with an increasing number of isolates
  exhibiting higher MIC values over time.

[]

  90

80. CIPROFLOXACIN MIC TREND (2014 - 2022)

70

60

50

40

30

20

10

0

  Figure 4.2: Ciprofloxacin MIC trends in Salmonella Typhi from pan
  India over a period of nine years

[]

  []2014-2016

  []2017-2019

  []2020

  []2021

  []2022

MIC TREND

  []2014-2016 []2017-2019 []2020 []2021 []2022

  Figure 4.3: MIC trend for Ceftriaxone in S. Typhi from Pan India over
  a period of nine years

[]

103. AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

[]

  Figure 4.4: Azithromycin MIC trend in S. Typhi over a period of nine
  years from Pan India

  Salmonella Paratyphi A

  The antibiotic susceptibility pattern of S. Paratyphi A from 2017 to
  2022 reveals the consistent pattern i.e. from 95% to 96.4% except in
  2019 where 90% susceptibility was reported (Table 4.4 and Figure 4.5).
  Chloramphenicol and trimethoprim - sulmethoxazole susceptible pattern
  was also consistent from 2017 to 2022.

  Ciprofloxacin sensitivity has decreased significantly from 10% in 2017
  to 0.8% in 2022. Ceftriaxone antimicrobial susceptibility has
  increased from 95% in 2017 to 100% in 2021 and further 96.5% in 2022.
  Cefixime was 96.3% susceptible in 2017 followed by 100% in 2021.
  During 2022 it was 90% (72/80) susceptible. Azithromycin was not
  analysed as azithromycin susceptibility cutoff for S. Paratyphi A are
  not given in CLSI.

  Table 4.4: Yearly susceptibility trends of S.Paratyphi A from blood

[]

[]

  104 AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

120

[]

100

  80

  60

  40

  20

  0 [] Year-2017 Year-2018 Year-2019 Year-2020 Year-2021 Year 2022

  [] Ampicillin []Ceftriaxone []Ciprofloxacin
  []Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole

  Figure 4.5: Yearly susceptibility trends of S. Paratyphi A from Blood

  Among Salmonella Paratyphi A, the majority of isolates exhibited an
  intermediate MIC range (0.125-0.5 µg/ml) for ciprofloxacin. However, a
  significant shift occurred in 2021 and 2022, with the emergence of
  isolates showing higher MIC ranges of 128 µg/ml to 256 µg/ml. In 2022,
  50% of the isolates exhibited intermediate susceptibility, while the
  remaining 50% showed complete non-susceptibility to fluoroquinolones
  (Figure 4.6).

  In S. Paratyphi A, both MIC50 and MIC90 values for ciprofloxacin have
  increased over time. In 2014, the MIC50 was observed to be 0.38 µg/ml,
  which gradually increased to 0.5 µg/ml by 2019. Since 2020, the MIC50
  has remained stable at 0.75 µg/ml, while the MIC90 has continued to
  rise, reaching 6 µg/ml in 2022. It is noteworthy that fluoroquinolone
  resistance is higher in S. Paratyphi A compared to S. Typhi. During
  the period of 2014-2016, the majority of isolates fell within the MIC
  range of 0.064 µg/ml. However, there was a noticeable shift towards
  higher MIC values during 2017-2019, with the maximum number of
  isolates falling within the range of 0.125-0.25 µg/ml. In the years
  2020 and 2021, the MIC range for the maximum number of isolates was
  observed to be 0.064-0.125 µg/ml. In 2022, there was a shift towards
  lower MIC values, specifically within the range of 0.032-0.064 µg/ml.
  It is important to note that some isolates with creeping MIC values
  were identified. None of the isolates, however, exhibited resistance
  to ceftriaxone (Figure 4.7). It is important to acknowledge the
  presence of isolates with creeping MIC values, indicating a potential
  for future resistance development. However, none of the isolates
  exhibited resistance to ceftriaxone during the study period.

[]

105. AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

[]

  Figure 4.6: Ciprofloxacin MIC trends in Salmonella Paratyphi A from
  Pan India over a period of nine years

  300

  250

  200

  150

240

[]

100. ⁸³

  Figure 4.7: Ceftriaxone creeping MIC in S. Paratyphi A from pan India
  over a period of nine years

  Clinical relevance and treatment guidance

  Considering the increasing resistance to antibiotics, the analysis of
  antimicrobial susceptibility results highlights the importance of
  accurate diagnosis and appropriate antibiotic treatment for typhoid
  fever.

  The isolation trends revealed a dynamic pattern of S. Typhi prevalence
  and geographical distribution in India over a five-year period from
  2017 to 2022. It is also important to

[]

106. AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

  highlight that the number of strains exhibiting higher MIC values has
  increased in both 2021 and 2022, indicating a potential shift towards
  reduced susceptibility to ciprofloxacin in recent years.

  The historical development of antibiotic resistance demonstrates the
  gradual acquisition of resistance, leading to the designation of
  fluoroquinolones as the first-line drugs due to the emergence of
  multidrug-resistant strains.

  Currently, third-generation cephalosporins and azithromycin are the
  available treatment options for multidrug-resistant and
  fluoroquinolone-resistant typhoid fever. However, the emergence of
  extensively drug-resistant (XDR) strains in Asian countries has
  severely limited treatment choices. Continuous surveillance and
  focused attention are necessary to prevent the spread of these XDR
  strains, considering the elimination of geographical boundaries due to
  travel and the dissemination of drug-resistant isolates.

  In a small percentage of strains, susceptibility was observed despite
  the presence of resistance genes, particularly for chloramphenicol and
  cotrimoxazole. Notably, no resistance to ceftriaxone or the presence
  of the CTXM-15 gene was detected in any typhoidal strain, while
  OXA-232 and TEM-1 were detected in three Salmonella species.
  Furthermore, none of the studied isolates exhibited resistance genes
  associated with azithromycin, indicating susceptibility to this
  antibiotic. Due to the small numbers of isolates from each regional
  center, no significant regional variations were observed in the
  distribution of resistance genes. However, when comparing different
  regions of India (East, West, North, and South), the presence of
  gyrase mutations other than S83F was observed primarily in strains
  from North and West India. On a national scale, the distribution of
  fluoroquinolone resistance mechanisms and genes exhibited variability.

  Predominantly, 96% (74/77) mutation were present in gyrase and 38%
  (29/77) were reported in topoisomerase IV. In gyrase, mutation at S83F
  was the most common and accounted for 80% (60/77) of all mutations
  while S83Y mutations were reported in 21% (16/77) isolates followed by
  27% (21/77) mutations at D87N. Distribution of mutation in
  topoisomerase IV accounted for 32% (25/77) in parC gene at S80I and 1%
  (1/77) in parE gene at L416F.

  Strains with intermediate ciprofloxacin susceptibility had single
  mutation at gyrA S83F or double mutation at gyrA S83F and parC S80I of
  the QRDR. While strains with higher ciprofloxacin MIC had triple
  mutation at gyrA at S83F, D87N and parC S80I or parE D420N. Mutation
  in parE gene at L416F, was also found in one isolate each with
  ciprofloxacin intermediate MIC.

  Therefore, not all strains showed an association of genetic mutations
  and phenotypic resistance and supporting the fact that mere presence
  of gene may not be sufficient to impart clinical resistance and many
  factors may come into play including expression of gene and antibiotic
  selection pressure while the patient is on treatment. Region-wise
  there was no significant difference in the distribution of mutation
  and antibiotic susceptibility pattern. However, the presence of
  resistance mutation in susceptible strains is a cause of concern
  because it can lead to their expression on exposure to
  fluoroquinolones and subsequent emergence of ciprofloxacin resistance.
  Therefore, the

[]

107. AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

  genotypic studies and continuous surveillance of antimicrobial
  resistance is necessary to understand the mechanism and epidemiology
  of resistance.

  The antimicrobial susceptibility analysis provides variable
  sensitivity patterns of S. Typhi and S. Paratyphi A to various
  antibiotics. While S. Typhi shows higher sensitivity rates to some
  antibiotics, such as ampicillin, chloramphenicol, and
  trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole, its sensitivity to ciprofloxacin has
  decreased over the years. The susceptibility patterns of S. Paratyphi
  A also exhibit variations across different antibiotics. These findings
  accentuate the importance of continued surveillance and the need for
  alternative treatment strategies to combat the rising levels of
  antibiotic resistance in typhoid fever.

  Characterisation of resistance mechanism

  The relationships between resistance gene content identified from WGS
  was deciphered with the drug resistance profile for each corresponding
  clinical isolate (phenotype). 25% of all representative samples from
  all centers were selected. The following observations were made on the
  basis of WGS analysis. Total 105 isolates were selected for WGS which
  includes 65 Salmonella Typhi, 26 Salmonella Paratyphi A and 14
  Salmonella Species. In Salmonella Typhi, the ampicillin resistance is
  associated with the presence of beta-lactam genes which were observed
  in 4.6% strains (3/65) by WGS. In all the strains, blaTEM-1D
  beta-lactam resistance gene was observed. The resistance genes encode
  for the predominant plasmid-mediated β-lactamases of Enterobacterales.
  An earlier report for amoxicillin resistance in Salmonella from
  pan-India was 2%. In case of Salmonella Paratyphi A, all strains were
  sensitive. Other gene responsible for resistance rsmA, sdi A and marA
  were present. Chloramphenicol resistance determinants were observed in
  6% (4/65) Salmonella Typhi strains by WGS. All non-susceptible strains
  harboured catA1 gene which encodes chloramphenicol acetyltransferase
  enzyme causing chloramphenicol resistance by chemical modification of
  the drug molecule, whereas ten isolates harboured the catI genes. Our
  findings are consistent with other studies reporting chloramphenicol
  susceptibility in S. enterica.

  Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole were considered in combination for
  treatment as the first-line drug, co-trimoxazole. Out of 65 strains,
  trimethoprim resistance determining genes were found in 6% (4/65).
  Likewise, gene sul1 and sul2, encoding dihydropteroate synthases known
  to disseminate sulfamethoxazole resistance, were also detected in 6%
  (4/65).

  Molecular determinants of resistance to fluoroquinolone including
  ciprofloxacin and pefloxacin antibiotics encoded by gyrA and parC,
  genes were detected in 72.3% strains (47/65) by WGS. Mutations in gyrA
  and parC, was observed in 44.6% (21/47) followed by only gyrA mutation
  in 48.9% (23/47) isolates. The identified genes were associated with
  mutations in Quinolone Resistance Determining Region of DNA gyrase
  enzyme, the binding site for fluoroquinolone. Antimicrobial resistance
  to fluoroquinolones was 72.3% by both disc diffusion and E-test
  method. MIC distribution ranged between 2–

[]

108. AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

  256 mg/L and peaked at 12 mg/L. DNA Gyrase A mutations at position 83
  (Ser-83→Phe, Ser-83→Tyr and Asp 87→ Phe) are the most prevalent
  resistance mechanisms for Fluoroquinolone in India, followed by
  Ser-80→Ile substitution in parC gene. Highly non-susceptible strains
  (with ciprofloxacin MIC > 8 mg/L) were found to be double or triple
  mutants with mutations in gyrA83, gyrA87 and parC80. Strains with
  moderate resistance to ciprofloxacin possessed single mutations in DNA
  gyrA gene at Ser83 position.

  In case of Salmonella Paratyphi A, phenotypically 80.7% (21/26)
  strains were intermediate and 15.3% (4/26) were resistant to
  fluoroquinolone. Mutations in gyrA gene were detected in 100% of the
  strains. Double mutation in gyrAS83F and D87N was observed in one
  strain followed by triple mutation in only one strain. Other
  fluoroquinolone resistance mechanism CRP, acrR, marR, soxR, acrB,
  emrA, emrB, mdtk and rsmA were also present.

  Although all the strains were cephalosporin sensitive, mutations in
  PBP3 gene at D350N, S357N, Escherichia coli ampC1 beta-lactamase, and
  Escherichia coli ampH beta-lactamase gene was present in all tested
  isolates. This clearly raises an alarm towards the judicial use of
  these antibiotics. All isolates were azithromycin susceptible. Other
  genes responsible for macrolide resistance nalD, KpnE, CRP were also
  observed by WGS. S. Typhi can demonstrate resistance to multiple
  antibiotics by acquiring new resistance genes through horizontal genes
  transfer (HGT). The acquired antimicrobial resistance genes including
  aac(6’)-Iaa, AAC(6’)-Iy, aadA1, aph(3”)-Ib, aph(6)-Id, strA, and strB
  that provided resistance to aminoglycosides were observed in 100%
  (89/89) isolates. In addition, S. Typhi isolates harboured the genes
  baeR, emrb, H-NS, marA, mdfA, mdtK, msbA, acrA, emrR, kpnE, kpnF,
  marR, sdiA, crp, soxR, and soxS that could confer multidrug resistance
  and were detected in all 133 strains. The mds ABC complex, a multidrug
  transporter of Salmonella, comprising mdsA, mdsB, and mdsC units was
  also observed in all isolate. The mdsABC complex is recognized to
  contribute resistance against a diverse set of drugs and toxins. The
  identified multi-efflux pump mdtK gene, conferring resistance against
  the drugs, acriflavin, doxorubicin and norfloxacin, was observed in
  100% of the isolates. The gene, sdiA, a multi-drug resistance pump
  regulator for AcraB, was also present in 100% of the isolates.

  The pathogenicity and resistance profile of the various Salmonella
  isolates can be attributed to the presence of identified genes.

  Multi-locus sequence typing (MLST) profile disclosed low genetic
  variation in housekeeping genes (aroC, dnaN, hemD, hisD, purE, sucA,
  and thrA) among Salmonella Typhi, Salmonella Paratyphi A and other
  Salmonella isolates. Two different sequence types (STs) including ST1
  and ST2 were observed in Salmonella Typhi while Salmonella Paratyphi A
  was divided in ST 85 and ST129 respectively. ST1 was the predominant
  type, accounting for 70% of examined strains, whereas ST2 was observed
  in 29% of the strains (Table 4.5). In case of S. Paratyphi A, ST85 was
  observed in 3 and ST129 was observed in 10 isolates. S. Typhimurium
  was grouped in to ST19, ST313, ST36 followed by S. enteritidis grouped
  as ST11. Salmonella Alachua was grouped as ST2061 and S.

[]

109. AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

  Bovismorbificans was grouped as ST2345. Presence of different type of
  plasmids (IncFIB(S)/IncFII(S), IncFI (pN55391), IncX1) was also
  observed in Salmonellae species. In summary, our findings demonstrate
  a consistent correlation between the presence of resistance-associated
  genes or mutations and the observed antimicrobial susceptibility
  patterns.

  MLST:

  Multi-locus sequence typing (MLST) profile disclosed low genetic
  variation in housekeeping genes (aroC, dnaN, hemD, hisD, purE, sucA,
  and thrA) among Salmonella Typhi, Salmonella Paratyphi A and other
  Salmonella isolates. Two different sequence types (STs) including ST1
  and ST2 were observed in Salmonella Typhi while Salmonella Paratyphi A
  was divided in ST 85 and ST129 respectively. ST1 was the predominant
  type, accounting for 70% of examined strains, whereas ST2 was observed
  in 29% of the strains (Table 4.5). In case of S.Para A, ST85 was
  observed in 3 and ST129 was observed in 10 isolates. S. Typhimurium
  was grouped in to ST19, ST313, ST36 followed by S. enteritidis grouped
  as ST11. Salmonella Alachua was grouped as ST2061 and S.
  Bovismorbificans was grouped as ST2345. Presence of different type of
  plasmids (IncFIB(S)/IncFII(S), IncFI (pN55391), IncX1) was also
  observed in Salmonella species.

  Table 4.5.a: MLST grouping of all Salmonella

[]

[]

110. AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

  Table 4.5.b:- Mutations imparting resistance to ciprofloxacin in S.
  Typhi

[]

S. Typhi Ciprofloxacin resistance

[]

111. AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

[]

[]

112. AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

[]

[]

113. AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

  Table 4.5.c:- Mutations imparting resistance to ciprofloxacin in S.
  Paratyphi A

[]

[]

114. AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

  Table 4.5.d:- Mutations imparting resistance to ciprofloxacin in
  Salmonella Spp.

[]

Ciprofloxacin resistance in Salmonella Species

[]

115. AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

[]

  Table 4.5 e: Distribution of FQ resistance imparting mutations in DNA
  gyrases and topoisomerase IVof studied strains and coorelation with
  MIC

[]

[]

116. AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

  Table 4.6.a: Gnotyping analysis of antibiotic resistance by whole
  genome sequencing and comparison with phenotypic antibiotic
  sensitivity from JIPMER

[]

  P*- Present; NP*- Not present; I*- Intermediate; R*- Resistant; S**-
  Sensitive;

  CRP, acrA,acrR,marR,
  soxR,acrB,emrA,emrB,emrR,marA,mdtK,mdtM,rsmA,sdiA - Present in all
  isolates for FQ resistance acrA, acrR, ampC1, ampH, marR, soxR, soxS,
  PBP3, KpnE, acrB, marA, sdiA- Present in all isolates for
  Cephalosporin resistance CRP, KpnE, kpnF- Present in all isolates for
  Macrolide resistance

[]

117. AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

  Table 4.6.b: Genotyping analysis of antibiotic resistance by whole
  genome sequencing and comparison with phenotypic antibiotic
  sensitivity from RIMS, Imphal

[]

  Table 4.6 c: Genotyping analysis of antibiotic resistance by whole
  genome sequencing and comparison with phenotypic antibiotic
  sensitivity from SKIMS, Srinagar

[]

[]

118. AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

  Table 4.6.d: Genotyping analysis of antibiotic resistance by whole
  genome sequencing and comparison with phenotypic antibiotic
  sensitivity from AIIMS, New Delhi

[]

  Table 4.6. e: Genotyping analysis of antibiotic resistance by whole
  genome sequencing and comparison with phenotypic antibiotic
  sensitivity fromLTMMC, Mumbai

[]

[]

119. AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

  Table 4.6. f: Genotyping analysis of antibiotic resistance by whole
  genome sequencing and comparison with phenotypic antibiotic from Sir
  Gangaram, New Delhi

[]

[]

120. AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

  Table 4.6. g: Genotyping analysis of antibiotic resistance by whole
  genome sequencing and comparison with phenotypic antibiotic
  sensitivity from PD Hinduja

[]

  431143/S.Enteritidis-OXA-232 (P)

[]

121. AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

  Table 4.6.h: Genotyping analysis of antibiotic resistance by whole
  genome sequencing and comparison with phenotypic antibiotic
  sensitivity from Vellore

[]

  316086/S. Saintpaul-OXA-232 (P)

[]

122. AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

  Table 4.6. i: Genotyping analysis of antibiotic resistance by whole
  genome sequencing and comparison with phenotypic antibiotic
  sensitivity from TMC

[]

  79972/S.Typhurium-OXA-232 (P), TEM-1 (P), 96454/ST-TEM-1- P

[]

123. AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

  Table 4.6. j: Genotyping analysis of antibiotic resistance by whole
  genome sequencing and comparison with phenotypic antibiotic
  sensitivity from PGI

[]

[]

124. AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

  Table 4.6.k : Gnotyping analysis of antibiotic resistance by whole
  genome sequencing and comparison with phenotypic antibiotic
  sensitivity from JDH_AIIMS

[]

[]

125. AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

  Chapter 5. Non fermenting Gram-negative Bacteria (NFGNB)

  Among non-fermenting Gram-negative bacilli, Pseudomonas aeruginosa
  (50%) was more common followed by Acinetobacter baumannii (46%),
  Stenotrophomonas maltophilia (3%) and Burkholderia cepacia (0.4%). A.
  baumannii and P. aeruginosa causes serious healthcare associated
  infections such as pneumonia, bloodstream infections and postoperative
  wound infections. While, S. maltophilia and B. cepacia are the
  opportunistic pathogens in causing invasive infections, a significant
  increase in the trend of the isolation of Pseudomonas aeruginosa (9.5%
  in 2017 vs 22% in 2022), A. baumannii (7% in 2017 vs 25% in 2022) and
  S. maltophilia (6% in 2017 vs 30% in 2022) were seen. However, no
  significant difference in the trend of isolation of these pathogens
  was noticed in the last two years, except for S. maltophilia.

  Pseudomonas aeruginosa

  Infections with P. aeruginosa have become a real concern in
  hospital-acquired infections, especially in critically ill and
  immunocompromised patients. The major problem leading to high
  mortality lies in the appearance of drug-resistant strains. The rate
  of isolation of P. aeruginosa is higher in wards compared to OPD
  followed by ICU (Table 5.1). P. aeruginosa isolated from ward/ICU were
  found to multi-drug resistant than those that were isolated from OPD,
  which represent the increasing prevalence of multi-drug resistance in
  P. aeruginosa in hospital settings (Table 5.1). The percentage of
  susceptibility to anti-pseudomonal cephalosporin such as ceftazidime
  (56.4% vs 47.1%) and cefepime (60.3% vs 49.8%) was higher in those P.
  aeruginosa that were isolated from wards, compared to ICU. Overall,
  36% of P. aeruginosa isolates were resistant to carbapenems and was
  higher in ICU population (49%) compared to wards (63%). More than 50%
  of susceptibility to various aminoglycosides such as amikacin,
  gentamicin and tobramycin was noticed. Fluroquinolones (levofloxacin
  and ciprofloxacin) showed limited activity with the susceptibility of
  40 – 57% (Table 5.1).

  P. aeruginosa isolates from UTI and CSF showed higher rate of
  resistance to ceftazidime (41.2% & 43.6%), cefepime (46.1% & 48.1%),
  piperacillin-tazobactam (57.2% & 56.4%), imipenem (51.1% & 40.5%),
  meropenem (54.1% & 47.9%), amikacin (51.4% &

  60.4%), gentamicin (48.2% & 44.4%), tobramycin (50.1% & 65.8%),
  ciprofloxacin (35.9% & 38.5%) and levofloxacin (33.3% & 42.6%), except
  colistin. No significant change in the susceptibility was noticed in
  P. aeruginosa isolated from BSI, LRTI, superficial infection and deep
  infections (Table 5.2). In P. aeruginosa, there was no change in the
  trend of susceptibility to piperacillin/tazobactam, anti-pesudomonal
  cephalosporins such as ceftazidime and cefepime and aminoglycosides
  (Table 5.3 and Figure 5.1). A gradual increase in the resistance to
  carbapenems was noticed in P. aeruginosa, however it is not
  statistically significant. All the tested P. aeruginosa isolates were
  highly susceptible to colistin and there was no change in the trend of
  susceptibility to colistin for the five years.

[]

126. AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

  Table 5.1: Location-wise susceptible percentage of Pseudomonas
  aeruginosa isolated from all samples (except faeces) across OPD, Ward
  and ICU

[]

  *Colistin represents percentage Intermediate susceptibility

  Table 5.2: Sample-wise susceptible percentage of Pseudomonas
  aeruginosa

[]

[]

127. AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

  Table 5.3: Yearly susceptible trend of Pseudomonas aeruginosa isolated
  from all samples

[]

  *Colistin represents percentage Intermediate susceptibility

[]

Figure 5.1. Yearly susceptible trend of Pseudomonas aeruginosa isolated
from all samples.

[]

128. AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

  Acinetobacter baumannii

  Isolation rate of A. baumannii was found to be higher in wards and
  ICUs, compared to OPD (Table 5.4), indicates the adaption of pathogen
  to hospital settings with increased resistance to various antibiotics.
  All the tested antibiotics showed limited activity against A.
  baumannii isolates and the pattern of susceptibility was similar,
  irrespective of the location and clinical source of the isolation
  (Table 5.4 and Table 5.5). Nearly, 88% of the isolates were resistant
  to carbapenems (Table 5.4) and left with limited treatment options.
  Against A. baumannii, piperacillin/tazobactam, cefepime, ceftazidime,
  amikacin and levofloxacin showed limited activity (Table 5.4). No
  change in the trend of susceptibility was observed between 2017 and
  2022 (Table 5.6 and Figure 5.2). Nearly 55% of the tested isolates
  were found to be susceptible to minocycline and 8% drop in the
  susceptibility to minocycline was noticed (67% in 2017 vs 59% in 2022)
  and there was no significant change in the susceptibility to
  minocycline was noticed for the last two years. All the tested A.
  baumannii isolates were highly susceptible to colistin.

  Table 5.4: Location-wise susceptible percentage of A. baumannii
  isolated from all samples except faeces across OPD, Ward and ICU

[]

  *Colistin represents percentage Intermediate susceptibility of
  Acinetobacter spp.

[]

129. AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

  Table 5.5: Sample-wise susceptible percentage of A. baumannii

[]

  *Colistin represents percentage Intermediate susceptibility of
  Acinetobacter spp.

  Table 5.6: Yearly susceptible trend of A. baumannii isolated from all
  samples except faeces

[]

  *Colistin represents percentage Intermediate susceptibility of
  Acinetobacter spp.

[]

130. AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

25

[]

20

15

10

  5

  0 [] Year-2017 Year-2018 Year-2019 Year-2020 Year-2021 Year-2022

  []Amikacin []Ceftazidime []Piperacillin-tazobactam

  []Imipenem []Meropenem

  Figure 5.2: Yearly susceptible trend of A. baumannii isolated from all
  samples except faeces

  Stenotrophomonas maltophilia

  S. maltophilia was frequently isolated from wards and ICU compared to
  OPD (Table 5.7). No significant change in the susceptibility pattern
  was seen, irrespective of the location and sample of isolation (Table
  5.7 and Table 5.8). Overall, S. maltophilia were highly susceptible to
  minocycline (96.6%), levofloxacin (90.3 %) and
  trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (86.1%) and ceftazidime (75.3%) (Table
  5.8). There is no significant change in the trend of susceptibility
  was noticed between 2017 and 2022 (Table 5.9 and Figure 5.3).

  Table 5.7. Location-wise susceptible percentage of Stenotrophomonas
  maltophilia isolated from all samples across OPD, Ward and ICU

[]

[]

131. AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

  Table 5.8: Sample-wise susceptible percentage of Stenotrophomonas
  maltophilia

[]

  Table 5.9: Yearly susceptible trend of Stenotrophomonas maltophilia
  isolated from all samples

[]

[]

100

90

  80

  70

  60

  50

  40

  30

  20

  10

  0 [] Year-2017 Year-2018 Year-2019 Year-2020 Year-2021 Year-2022

[]

  Figure 5.3: Yearly susceptible trend of Stenotrophomonas maltophilia
  isolated from all samples

[]

132. AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

  Burkholderia cepacia

  Burkholderia cepacia is an important opportunistic pathogen and
  intrinsically resistant to multiple classes of antibiotics, including
  aminoglycosides and polymyxins. Among the tested antibiotics, higher
  rate susceptibility to ceftazidime (90%), meropenem (72.4%),
  minocycline (76.9%) and trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (85.2%) were
  seen. There is no significant difference in the susceptibility profile
  of B. cepacia in location-wise (Table 5.10) and the clinical source of
  isolation (Table 5.11). There is no notable change in the trend of
  susceptibility in B. cepacia during the surveillance period from 2017
  to 2022 (Table 5.12 and Figure 5.4). Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole
  (TMP-SMX) and ceftazidime are considered first-line options for B.
  cepacia infections, however, in-vitro resistance to
  trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole and ceftazidime seen in this
  surveillance, clearly demonstrates limited treatment options.
  Carbapenems and minocycline can be used as an alternative.

  Table 5.10: Location-wise susceptible percentage of Burkholderia
  cepacia isolated from all samples across OPD, Ward and ICU

[]

[]

133. AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

  Table 5.12: Yearly susceptible trend of Burkholderia cepacia isolated
  from all samples

[]

[]

100

90

80

70

60

50

40

30

20

10

0

Year-2017 Year-2018 Year-2019 Year-2020 Year-2021 Year-2022

  []Meropenem []Ceftazidime []Minocycline
  []Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole

Figure 5.4: Yearly susceptible trend of Burkholderia cepacia isolated
from all samples

[]

134. AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

  Clinical relevance and treatment guidance

  Pseudomonas aeruginosa:

  NDM-expressing P. aeruginosa and A. baumannii are difficult to treat
  and there are no defined treatment options. Deficiency of OprD and
  overproduction of active efflux pumps, ampC β-lactamase,
  extended-spectrum β-lactamases, and carbapenemases, especially
  metallo-β-lactamase (MBL) production, have been reported as the main
  contributors to multi-drug resistant phenotypes of P. aeruginosa
  isolates. Resistance to piperacillin-tazobactam, ceftazidime,
  cefepime, aztreonam, meropenem, imipenem-cilastatin, ciprofloxacin,
  and levofloxacin but with preserved susceptibility to the novel BL-BLI
  combinations and colistin was proposed and denominated
  difficult-to-Treat (DTR) Resistant P. aeruginosa. Colistin or
  fosfomycin based combination strategy would be the best alternative
  for the treatment of DTR P. aeruginosa infection.

  Acinetobacter baumannii

  Infection with carbapenem A. baummannii results in 40% mortality,
  irrespective of therapy. High-dose ampicillin-sulbactam, in
  combination with either colistin, polymyxin B, or tigecycline are the
  recommended front-line treatment of invasive carbapenem resistant A.
  baumannii infections. The preferred treatment options are
  ampicillin-sulbactam with tigecycline for pneumonia and complicated
  intra-abdominal infection, ampicillin-sulbactam with polymyxin B for
  bloodstream infection, ampicillin-sulbactam with colistin for urinary
  tract infections. It is suggested to reserve the addition of a third
  agent for patients with delayed clinical responses or recurrent
  infections. As with any treatment regimen selected, timely source
  control and close monitoring for clinical response and toxicity are
  required.

  Stenotrophomonas maltophilia

  S. maltophilia has emerged as a difficult-to-treat opportunistic
  nosocomial pathogen. The clinical challenges posed by this
  microorganism extend beyond its intrinsic multidrug resistance. S.
  maltophilia is intrinsically resistant to β-lactams is mediated by the
  expression of two inducible β-lactamases, L1, a class B3
  metallo-β-lactamase (MBL), and L2, a class A clavulanic acid
  susceptible cephalosporinase. L1 MBLs inactivate carbapenems and other
  β-lactams quite readily and are not inhibited by currently available
  β-lactamase inhibitors. However, an important exception is aztreonam,
  a monobactam, which is not inactivated by L1 MBLs. L2 β-lactamases are
  inducible cephalosporinases that confer resistance to
  extended-spectrum cephalosporins and aztreonam but are susceptible to
  inhibition by commercially available serine-β-lactamase inhibitors
  such as clavulanic acid and avibactam. Therefore, the combination of
  ceftazidime/avibactam with azteronam would be the better alternative
  for minocycline in the treatment of S. maltophilia infections.

[]

135. AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

  Burkholderia cepacia

  Infections due to B. cepacia can be challenging to treat, as it is
  intrinsically resistant to a number of commonly used antibiotics. B.
  cepacia often is susceptible to trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole,
  meropenem, minocycline, and tigecycline. Ceftazidime-avibactam has
  shown activity against multidrug-resistant B. cepacia complex strains
  and was found to be useful in persistent bacteraemia.

  Characterisation of resistance mechanism

  P. aeruginosa

  A total of 884 P. aeruginosa isolates recovered from various clinical
  specimens were received at the reference laboratory. Of them 753
  isolates were retrieved and available for further molecular testing
  (Table 5.13). Of the 753 isolates, 324 were identified as carbapenem
  resistant and were screened for the presence of beta lactamases by
  molecular methods (ESBLs and carbapenemases). Among ESBLs, blaVEB was
  identified as the most common ESBL followed by blaTEM gene. None of
  the isolates had blaSHV and blaPER like seen in the previous year of
  2021. Among the carbapenemases, blaNDM was found as the most common
  metallo beta lactamase, followed by blaVIM and blaIMP genes (Table
  5.13). In P. aeruginosa, co- producers of ESBLs and carbapenemases
  were common. Among the co- producers, blaNDM co-carried with ESBLs
  such as blaTEM, blaVEB and blaGES genes were predominantly seen (n =
  22, 73%). Trend analysis over the last two years highlights that there
  is a significant shift from blaVIM to blaNDM producers across
  different geographical location.

[]

136. AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

  Table 5.13: Molecular characterization of carbapenem resistant P.
  aeruginosa collected across India during the year 2022

[]

PCR

Negative

18

91

41

24

5

18

35

12

  42

44

25

137. AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

[]

[]

21

38

13

27

14

31

52

551

138. AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

  A. baumannii

  A total of 738 isolates received from various regional centers were
  subjected to PCR for characterization of antimicrobial resistance
  genes (Table 5.14). All the isolates harboured the blaOXA-51 like
  gene, which is intrinsic to Acinetobacter baumannii. Molecular gene
  profile of all the of the tested A. baumannii isolates is given in
  Table 3.14. As expected, blaOXA-23 like only was the predominant
  carbapenemase across all the centers contributing to 76% of the
  carbapenem resistance. Co- producers of OXA-23 with ESBLs and/or NDM
  was observed across all the centers. Of which, the majority of the
  isolates 56% (n=357) had dual carbapenemases of blaOXA-23 like with
  blaNDM like. The combination of blaOXA-23 with blaPER in 13% (n=88)
  and blaOXA-23 with blaTEM in 5% (n=30) was noted. The antimicrobial
  resistance gene profile was found to be consistent across all the
  centers with blaOXA-23 like being the predominant carbapenemase and
  sporadic presence of blaOXA-58 like were observed. There was no
  significant change in the trend dual carbapenemase co- producers
  (blaOXA-23 like with blaNDM like) from 57% in 2020 to 56% in 2022.

[]

139. AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

  Table 5.14: Molecular characterization of carbapenem resistant A.
  baumannii collected across India during the year 2022

[]

[]

140. AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

[]

[]

141. AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

[]

[]

142. AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

  Chapter 6. Staphylococci and Enterococci

  A total of 9415 Staphylococcus aureus, 6333 CoNS and 6965 enterococci
  isolates collected across India were analysed in the year 2022. The
  total number of isolates available for analysis in 2022 was higher
  than in 2021.

  Staphylococcus aureus

  A total of 9415 isolates of S. aureus was reported from different
  centres across India. Identification of MRSA was done by testing
  susceptibility to cefoxitin (8387) and/or oxacillin (3036). The
  overall proportion of MRSA was 44.5% and 43.7% based on the 2 methods
  respectively.The proportion of MRSA in 2022 was slightly higher than
  the rate reported in 2021 (42.6%) (Table 6.1). There was a discrepancy
  in the MRSA rates detected by oxacillin MIC and cefoxitin DD/MIC
  (43.7% vs 44.5%). This discrepancy could be because of the smaller
  number of isolates tested against oxacillin than against cefoxitin.
  Moreover the same isolates may not have been tested by both the
  methods. As per CLSI guidelines, an isolate of S.aureus may be
  identified as MRSA using cefoxitin and /or oxacillin. On some
  occasions, only one of the two methods may be positive for eg: mecC
  isolates may sometimes be cefoxitin sensitive but oxacillin resistant.
  This could explain the few isolates of MRSA in table 6.1 which
  demonstrated susceptibility to cefoxitin or oxacillin.

  Susceptibility to tetracycline, clindamycin co-trimoxazole,
  erythromycin and ciprofloxacin, was more evident in MSSA when compared
  to MRSA. The anti MRSA antibiotics such as vancomycin and tigecycline
  showed excellent in vitro activity (100% against MRSA isolates).
  Linezolid resistance was encountered in MRSA, MSSA as well as CoNS
  isolates (2.1%, 0.6% and 0.9% respectively). These rates were slightly
  higher than those encountered in 2021.

  Table 6.2 shows the susceptibility pattern of S. aureus and CoNS
  across different hospital locations. As expected, the overall MRSA
  rates among S.aureus were lowest in the OPD isolates (40.1%) while it
  was moderate among ward isolates (47.3%) and higher among in the ICU
  isolates (50.1%). The susceptibility to most antibiotics was least
  among ICU isolates and highest among OPD isolates of S. aureus
  including MRSA and CoNS. However, among S. aureus, susceptibility to
  ciprofloxacin was slightly higher among ICU and OPD isolates than ward
  although the difference was not significant. Linezolid resistance
  among MRSA, CoNS and MSSA isolates showed rates of 2.1 %, 0.9%, and
  0.6% respectively. Teicoplanin resistance was slightly higher among
  CoNS and MSSA than the MRSA isolates and showed rates of 4 %, 0.6
  percent, and 0.2 percent, respectively. There was not much difference
  observed across different locations.

[]

  143 AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

  Table 6.1: Percentage susceptibility of S. aureus, MSSA, MRSA and CoNS
  isolated from all samples

[]

[]

  144 AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

Table 6.2: Location-wise susceptibility of S. aureus, MSSA, MRSA and
CoNS from all samples

[]

[]

  145 AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

[]

*Although all isolates were found susceptible to vancomycin by MIC, a
few of the isolates were found to be hVISA by PAP-AUC analysis.

[]

  146 AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

  Centerwise analysis

  The significant differences in MRSA rates observed between the various
  regional centres, the highest rate in the isolates from RC18 and RC20
  (86.3% and 85.3%) (Table 6.3). The lowest MRSA rates were observed
  from the RC08 (27.7%) and RC04 (23.8%) based on cefoxitin test
  results. However, it should be noted that in RC02 and RC11 oxacillin
  resistance was used to identify MRSA rather than cefoxitin (592vs 1
  and 203 vs 33, respectively). This variation in MRSA rates across
  centres may be indicative of the differences in the antibiotic
  prescription practices and usage in the different regions. It could
  also reflect different methodologies adopted across centres to
  identify MRSA. Ciprofloxacin susceptibility was extremely low across
  all the centres. The susceptibility rate of other antibiotics varied
  widely between the centres for many of the antibiotics like
  erythromycin (15.5 % in RC 13 to 59.3% in RC 04), tetracycline (67.2 %
  in RC19 to 94.4% in RC08), clindamycin (49.3% in RC13 to 97.9 % in
  RC14), co-trimoxazole (35.1% in RC12 to 94.8 % in RC03). Linezolid
  resistance ranged from 0.2% in RC 01 to 35.2% in RC 12.

  Most of the S. aureus isolates were obtained from superficial
  infections followed by blood stream and deep infections. MRSA rates
  differed based on the source of isolation, with isolates from deep
  infection demonstrating highest rates (51.5%) while those from
  superficial infections showed the lowest rates (41.5%).

  Although S. aureus, overall, showed increasing trends of resistance to
  most antibiotics over the years, no such prominent trend could be
  observed with MSSA isolates. There was only a marginal decrease in the
  susceptibility rates to erythromycin. Overall susceptibility rates to
  erythromycin, clindamycin, ciprofloxacin, co-trimoxazole was more
  evident in MSSA when compared to MRSA.

  The comparison of the susceptibility rates of S.aureus in 2022 with
  the rates seen between 2017-21 was depicted (Table 6.4 and Figure
  6.1). Overall MRSA rates have increased each year from 2017 to 2022
  (32.9% to 45.5%). Susceptibility to most antibiotics showed almost
  similar rates as in the previous years. Resistance to tigecycline was
  not seen in 2016 but it appeared in a small number of isolates in 2017
  and 2018 (0.5%), 2019 (0.4%), 2021 (0.8%). No tigecycline resistance
  was observed among 2022 isolates. Cefoxitin resistance, the surrogate
  marker for MRSA, was observed nearly twice as frequently among CoNS
  compared to S. aureus (78.2% vs 45.5%).

[]

  147 AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

  Table 6.3: Antimicrobial Susceptibility (AMS) Percentage RC wise of
  Staphylococcus aureus from all samples except faeces and urine

[]

[]

  148 AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

[]

  *Although all isolates were found susceptible to vancomycin by MIC, a
  few of the isolates were found to be hVISA by PAP-AUC analysis.

[]

  149 AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

  Table 6.4: Year wise susceptibility trends of Staphylococcus aureus
  from all samples

[]

[]

120

100

80

60

40

20

0

  Year-2017 Year-2018 Year-2019 Year-2020 Year-2021 Year-2022

  Figure 6.1: Year wise susceptibility trends of S. aureus from all
  samples

[]

  150 AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

Table 6.5 depicts the susceptibility rates of staphylococci from blood.
MRSA rate was slightly higher among blood isolates when compared to the
overall rate (47% vs 45.5%). CoNS were more commonly isolated from blood
than S. aureus from the different centres across India. Cefoxitin
resistance was observed more commonly among CoNS than the S.aureus (80%
vs 47%). When compared to MRSA, MSSA was more susceptible to
tetracycline, co-trimoxazole, clindamycin, erythromycin and
ciprofloxacin. The anti MRSA antibiotics such as linezolid, tigecycline
and vancomycin showed excellent in vitro activity.

As seen from Table 6.6, around 45% of the total S. aureus and 5.9% of
CoNS isolates were from superficial infections, MRSA rate was 41.5%.
When compared to MRSA, MSSA was more susceptible to tetracycline,
co-trimoxazole, clindamycin, erythromycin and ciprofloxacin. The anti
MRSA antibiotics such as teicoplanin, linezolid, tigecycline and
vancomycin showed excellent in vitro activity Teicoplanin and linezolid
resistance was found in CoNS isolates (6.2% and 2.3%). The proportion of
MRSA from deep seated infections is higher than the overall rate (51.5%
vs 44.5%) (Table 6.7). The anti MRSA antibiotics such as tigecycline and
vancomycin showed excellent in vitro activity. Teicoplanin and linezolid
resistance was found in CoNS isolates (1.6% and 1.1%).

Table 6.8 and figure 6.2 depict trends in antimicrobial susceptibility
among MSSA isolates across the 6 years of study (2017-22). Although
S.aureus, overall, showed increasing trends of resistance to most
antibiotics over the years, no such prominent trend could be observed
with MSSA isolates. There was only a marginal increase in the
susceptibility rates to clindamycin and co-trimoxazole. The unusual
occurrence of linezolid resistance rates was slightly increased in MSSA
isolates (0.1 to 0.6 %). Table 6.9 and figure 6.3 depict trends in
antimicrobial resistance in MRSA isolates across the 6 years (2017-22).
Susceptibility rates across the years were similar to most antibiotics
except co-trimaxazole which showed a slight increase in the
susceptibility among 2021 isolates which continued into 2022. The
teicoplanin resistance rates were increased in 2022 when compared to
2021 rates (0.1% and 0.6 %). Linezolid resistance was slightly increased
0.1% to 2.1% respectively.

[]

  151 AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

  Table 6.5: Susceptibility percentages of staphylococci isolated from
  blood

[]

[]

  152 AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

[]

  153 AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

  Table 6.8: Year wise susceptibility trends of MSSA from all samples

[]

[]

120

100

80

60

40

20

0

  Figure 6.2: Year wise susceptibility trends of MSSA from all samples

[]

  154 AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

Table 6.9: Year wise susceptibility trends of MRSA from all samples

[]

  AMA

  Cefoxitin

  Oxacillin

  Vancomycin

  Teicoplanin

  Erythromycin

  Tetracycline

  Tigecycline

  Ciprofloxacin

  Clindamycin

  Trimethoprim-

  sulfamethoxazole Linezolid

[]

120

100

80

60

40

20

  0 [] Year-2017 Year-2018 Year-2019 Year-2020 Year-2021 Year-2022

  []Ciprofloxacin []Vancomycin []Clindamycin []Cefoxitin []Linezolid

  Figure 6.3: Year wise susceptibility trends of MRSA from all samples

[]

  155 AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

  Coagulase negative staphylococci

  The common species were S. haemolyticus, S. epidermidis, S. hominis,
  S. lugdunensis and S. saprophyticus. Cefoxitin resistance was highest
  in S. haemolyticus (86.1 %) followed by S. epidermidis (75.1%) and S.
  hominis (74.6%). With the exception of teicoplanin, linezolid and
  tetracycline, S. haemolyticus exhibited much lower rates of
  susceptibility to all antibiotics when compared to the other species.
  Linezolid resistance rates remained unchanged in S. haemolyticus while
  it was slightly higher among S. lugdunensis (3.1%) and S.
  saprophyticus (2%) (Table 6.10). It can be clearly observed that there
  is a decrease in the susceptibility rates for most of the antibiotics
  except trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole in 2021 and 2022.

  Table 6.11 and figure 6.4 depict trends in antimicrobial
  susceptibility among CoNS isolates across the 6 years of study
  (2017-22). Although CoNS, overall, showed increasing trends of
  resistance to cefoxitin, erythromycin, tetracycline, ciprofloxacin and
  clindamycin over the years, there was only a marginal increase in the
  susceptibility rates to co-trimoxazole. Linezolid resistance rates
  were slightly increased in CoNS isolates (0.5 to 0.9 %) compared to
  2021 but was lower than in 2018 and 2019.

  Table 6.10: Susceptibility percentages of CoNS isolated from all
  specimens

[]

  All specimens

[]

  156 AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

  Table 6.11: Year wise susceptibility trends of CoNS from all samples

[]

[]

120

100

80

60

40

20

0

  Year2017 Year2018 Year2019 Year2020 Year2021 Year2022

[]Ciprofloxacin []Vancomycin []Clindamycin []Cefoxitin []Linezolid

  Figure 6.4: Year wise susceptibility trends of CoNS from all samples

[]

  157 AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

Enterococci

E. faecalis is usually the commonest species followed by E. faecium.
However in 2021, E. faecium was found to be the predominant species.
This trend was again reversed in 2022 where E. faecalis was once more
the predominant species. The susceptibility rate in E. faecium was
significantly lower for ampicillin, high level gentamicin and vancomycin
than in E. faecalis. Overall vancomycin resistance in enterococci was
16.7% (2022) slightly increased than the rate in 2021(14.9%). However,
the rate was 5 times higher in E. faecium compared to E. faecalis (27%
vs 5.3%). Isolates from blood (both the species) appear to be more
resistant when compared to isolates from superficial and deep infections
in E. faecium isolates. Although the numbers are too small for
significance, vancomycin resistance among CSF isolates was much higher
than the overall rate (Table 6.12).

The susceptibility to all the antibiotics was higher among E. faecalis
isolates when compared to E. faecium. The difference was particularly
marked for ampicillin, ciprofloxacin and nitrofurantoin. Fosfomycin
resistance increased from 8.5% in 2021 to 21.2% in 2022 (Table 6.13).
Resistance to this antibiotic was reported only from a few regional
centres (RC09, RC07, RC12, RC13, RC16, RC18, RC19, RC20, RC01). As
expected, most antibiotics showed lower susceptibility rates among ICU
isolates when compared to ward or OPD isolates. This difference was
noted in E. faecalis species (except for nitrofurantoin and linezolid)
in both case susceptibility rate were slightly higher in ward isolates
than the ICU (Table 6.14).

Enterococcus faecium

The trends in antibiotic susceptibility rates in E. faecium from
2017-2022 was depicted in Table 6.15 and figure 6.5. The susceptibility
rates showed a slight increase for ampicillin, high-level gentamicin,
nitrofurantoin in 2022 when compared to 2021 while there was a slight
reduction in susceptibility to vancomycin, linezolid and teicoplanin.
Compared to the index year of 2017, there was a significant reduction in
susceptibility to nitrofurantoin while it showed improvement for HLG.

In Enterococcus faecium the susceptibility rates to vancomycin ranged
from 54.2% to 95.5 % across regional centres (Table 6.16). Though the
overall VRE rate is 27% slightly increased compared to 2021 (25.7%),
there were significant differences observed between the various regional
centres, the highest VRE rate in the isolates from RC06 and RC12 (45.1%
and 45.8). The lowest VRE rates were observed from the RC17 (4.5%) and
RC09 (9.7%). Susceptibility to linezolid was high (>90%) in most
centres. However, one centre reported a very low susceptibility rate of
67.5%. Susceptibility to ampicillin was found to be lowest in the range
of (2.6% to 41.9%), while susceptibility to high level gentamicin ranged
between 29.7% to 67.6%.

[]

  158 AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

  Table 6.12: Susceptibility pattern of enterococci from all samples
  except urine

[]

[]

  159 AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

Table 6.13: Susceptibility pattern of enterococci from urine

[]

[]

  160 AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

  Table 6.14: Susceptibility pattern of enterococci from all samples
  across OPD, Ward and ICU

[]

[]

  161 AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

  Table 6.15: Year wise susceptibility trends of Enterococcus faecium
  from all samples

[]

[]

120

100

80

60

40

20

0

  Year2017 Year2018 Year2019 Year2020 Year2021 Year2022

  []Ciprofloxacin []Vancomycin []Ampicillin []Gentamicin HL []Linezolid

  Figure 6.5: Year wise susceptibility trends of Enterococcus faecium
  from all samples

[]

  162 AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

  Table 6.16: Antimicrobial Susceptibilities (AMS) Percentage RC wise of
  Enterococcus faecium from Total (Except Faeces & Urine)

[]

[]

  163 AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

  Enterococcus faecalis

  The trends in antibiotic susceptibility rates in E. faecalis from
  2017-2022 was depicted in Table 6.17 and figure 6.6. Lower
  susceptibility trends were observed for all antibiotics in 2022
  isolates when compared to 2021 except for ciprofloxacin (19.5 % to
  26.9 %), high level gentamicin (55.6% to 57.1%), and nitrofurantoin
  (86.2% to 88.4%). In E. faecalis the susceptibility rates of
  vancomycin (56.9% to 100%) and teicoplanin ranged from (71.4% to 100
  %) from most of the regional centres (Table 6.18).

  Though the overall VRE rate slightly increased 3.8% to 5.7%, there
  were significant differences observed between the various regional
  centres, the highest rate in the isolates from RC20 and RC15 (28.6%
  and 43.1%). The lowest VRE rates were observed from the RC04 (0.8%)
  and RC10 (1.2%). Susceptibility to linezolid was high in most of the
  centres in the range between 88.2% to 100%. Linezolid resistance was
  found to be the higher in the RC16 (11.8%) centre. The overall high
  level gentamicin susceptibility rate was at 57.8% which is the least
  recorded rate when compared to the other antibiotics. Susceptibility
  to ampicillin was found to be lowest in the range of (25.5% to 28.6%),
  while in the high level gentamicin moderate susceptibility was
  recorded in the range of (40% to 67.6%) across the centres.

[]

  164 AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

  Table 6.17: Year wise susceptibility trends of Enterococcus faecalis
  from all samples

[]

[]

120

100

80

60

40

20

0

  Year2017 Year2018 Year2019 Year2020 Year2021 Year2022

  []Ciprofloxacin []Vancomycin []Ampicillin

  []Gentamicin HL []Linezolid

  Figure 6.6: Year wise susceptibility trends of Enterococcus faecalis
  from all samples

[]

  165 AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

  Table 6.18 Antimicrobial Susceptibilities (AMS) Percentage RC wise of
  Enterococcus faecalis from all samples (Except Faeces & Urine)

[]

[]

  166 AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

  Clinical relevance and treatment guidance

  The proportion of MRSA and VRE was found to be higher among blood
  isolates than from other specimens which are a cause for concern.
  Although vancomycin susceptibility remains very high among MRSA
  isolates, the occurrence of hVISA which is not usually detected in
  most clinical laboratories is worrisome as it may lead to therapeutic
  failure. Although vancomycin may continue to be used for serious MRSA
  infections, it is better to use alternate drugs if the MIC value is
  close to the breakpoint as such isolates are likely to be hVISA.

  As susceptibility to daptomycin continues to be close to 100% among
  MRSA isolates, this antimicrobial may be considered as alternative
  agents besides vancomycin and linezolid for infections other than
  those of the respiratory tract. This may also remove some of the
  selection pressure on antimicrobial resistance genes exerted by these
  agents. The decision to start vancomycin empirically for serious S.
  aureus infections depends on the MRSA rates in that centre.

  In centres where MRSA rates are high, vancomycin or linezolid may be
  used as empirical therapy with de-escalation if required. On the other
  hand, in centres where MRSA rates are low, Beta lactams may be used as
  empirical therapy with escalation to glycopeptides/ linezolid/
  daptomycin as required. For skin and soft tissue infections, the
  possibility of using tetracyclines and or clindamycin may be
  considered as susceptibility rates to these two antibiotics continue
  to be high. Levonadifloxacin was tested on 771 isolates of MRSA, and
  all of them were shown to be susceptible. As per available literature,
  it appears to be highly efficient against acute bacterial skin and
  skin structure infections, as well as bacteraemia and diabetic foot
  infections.

  While it is relatively easy to assign clinical significance to S.
  aureus and Enterococcus species, the same is not true for CoNS. They
  are often dismissed as colonizers though they are being increasingly
  recognized as opportunistic pathogens, particularly S.haemolyticus.
  Another feature of importance is that these isolates are often multi
  drug resistant; the genes are carried on mobile elements which make
  transfer of resistance a distinct possibility. In cases where there is
  a strong possibility of CoNS being pathogens, it may be prudent to use
  either vancomycin or linezolid as the rates of resistance to beta
  lactams are extremely high.

  The numbers of E. faecium was almost equal to E. faecalis across most
  centres of India. This could signify a worrisome trend as this species
  is far more drug resistant when compared to E. faecalis. In serious
  infections, such as meningitis or bacteremia, linezolid may be tried
  as empirical therapy, with de-escalation if indicated. In centres
  which reported linezolid resistance in enterococci, daptomycin may be
  considered an alternative. The detection of Enterococcus species other
  than faecalis and faecium in high numbers is also significant as some
  of these species are intrinsically resistant to glycopeptides. Hence
  speciation of enterococci is of clinical significance and is not just
  an academic exercise.

[]

  167 AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

  Characterisation of resitance mechanism

  PCR for resistance genes

  The MRSA phenotype was conferred by mecA gene as determined by PCR of
  all randomly selected isolates from all centres. Since all were mecA
  positive, mecC gene PCR was not performed. Recently plasmid mediated
  mecB and mecD genes have been reported in S.aureus which may
  complicate detection methods even further (Becker K, 2018, Lakhundi
  and Zhang 2018). Unlike previous years, none of the randomly tested
  MSSA isolates (428) harboured mecA gene.

  Among the non-beta lactam antibiotics, macrolide resistance was
  conferred either through ermA/ermC/msrA/B genes. In the present study,
  the overall prevalence of ermC genes was high (26.7%) followed by
  msrA/B (23.9%) and ermC and msrA/B together was (5.3%). None of the
  isolates harboured ermB genes. These genes are usually found among
  streptococci. Resistance to the high-level mupirocin (200μg) was
  conferred by mupA gene in all mupirocin resistant isolates (Table:
  6.19A).

  Full blown vancomycin resistance was not encountered in 2022. Although
  there were no VRSA or VISA identified among the 2022 isolates of MRSA,
  some of the isolates were found to be hVISA when tested by PAP/AUC
  analysis. Of the 73 MRSA isolates from JIPMER subjected to PAP-AUC, 7
  were identified as hVISA (9.5%), while 36/456 were identified as hVISA
  (8%) from other centres. The overall rates of hVISA were 7.9%
  (43/529). Mupirocin resistance among MRSA isolates slightly increased
  from 5% to 7%. These rates have remained almost the same for last 3
  years possibly suggesting that mupirocin resistance genes exert a
  large fitness cost on MRSA. Resistance to tigecycline was not seen in
  2016 but it appeared in a small number of isolates in 2017 and 2018
  (0.5%), 2019 (0.4%), 2021 (0.8%). In 2022, none of the isolates
  exhibited tigecycline resistance

  MIC50 of different antibiotics against MRSA isolates

  MIC creep for the anti MRSA antibiotics has been presented taking 2018
  as the index year. There was a slight increase in MIC50 level of
  vancomycin in a few centers like RC09, RC07, RC20, RC02 isolates, (0.5
  to0.75µg/ml), while in the RC04, RC03, RC01, RC06 centers, the
  increase was more significant, from 0.38 to 1µg/ml, (compared to the
  previous year). The median MIC for linezolid among RC04 and RC16, RC12
  isolates increased slightly (0.75 to 1µg/ml), but it remained
  unchanged in isolates from other centers from the previous year for
  RC03, RC01, RC15, RC20, RC02. In the case of daptomycin, MIC level was
  slightly lower among RC06, RC07, RC16, RC09 isolates, but remained
  same for RC04, RC03, RC15, RC12. Tigecycline median MIC increased
  slightly in all the centres ranges between (0.032 to 0.25µg/ml), but
  remained the same in RC06 (0.064 µg/ml). Teicoplanin MIC slightly
  increased in all the centers (0.19 to 0.5µg/ml), (0.25 to 0.5µg/ml)
  and (0.5 to 0.75µg/ml). Vancomycin MIC in the majority of the hVISA
  isolates were in the ranges of 1µg/ml (24), 0.75 µg/ml (10) and 1.5
  µg/ml (8).

[]

  168 AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

  Antibiotic resistance genes among phenotypically resistant and
  sensitive isolates

  There were 593 isolates of vancomycin susceptible enterococci (269 E.
  faecium and 324 E. faecalis) which were screened for Vancomycin
  Variable Enterococcus (VVE) (by van A PCR). None of the isolates was
  identified as VVE. Antibiotic resistance genes among phenotypically
  resistant and sensitive isolates of S.aureus, CoNS and enterococci
  from nodal and regional centres are depicted in Table 6.19A and 6.19B
  respectively.

  All MRSA isolates were mediated by mecA gene. No other mec gene was
  detected. Among the macrolide resistance genes, ermC was found more
  commonly among the isolates from regional centres when compared to
  JIPMER isolates (58% vs 24%) while ermA was seen in a larger number of
  JIPMER isolates compared to those from regional centres (12% vs 1%).
  The percentage of macrolide resistant S. aureus carrying msr genes
  were higher among JIPMER isolates when compared to 2021 (44% vs
  28.6%). The percentage of isolates from regional centres carrying msr
  genes remained unchanged compared to the previous year. The genes
  coding for mupirocin resistance (mupA gene) and linezolid resistance
  (cfr gene) remained the same in the current year compared to the
  previous years.

  All vancomycin resistant enterococci carried the vanA gene only. Among
  susceptible S.aureus isolates, the only resistance genes found were
  the msrA/B in 4 of the isolates while it was found only in one isolate
  in 2021. VVE was identified in 5 isolates in 2020 and 3 isolates in
  2021. However there was no VVE detected in 2022.

  Biocide resistance genes (qacA/B and smr) among MRSA and VRE isolates

  480 isolates of MRSA and 185 VRE isolates were tested for the presence
  of qacA/B and smr genes. The overall prevalence of qacA/B and smr
  genes in MRSA isolates was 1.9% (9/480) and 1% (5/480) respectively.
  In Enterococcus, qacA/B was detected in 4.3 %

  (8/185) isolates while none had smr genes. Among MRSA isolates, qacA/B
  and smr genes slightly decreased from 2.4 % in 2021 to 1.9% in 2022
  while in enterococci there was an 8 fold increase from 0.45 to 4.3%.
  Most disinfectant-resistance genes are plasmid borne and can spread
  between staphylococcal species.

[]

  169 AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

  Table- 6.19 A: Antibiotic resistance genes among phenotypically
  resistant isolates of S. aureus, CoNS and enterococci from nodal and
  regional centres

[]

[]

  170 AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

  Table- 6.19 B: Antibiotic resistance genes among phenotypically
  sensitive isolates of S.aureus, CoNS and enterococci from nodal and
  regional centres

[]

[]

  vanA :0/563

  vanB : 0/563

vanC1/C2 : 0/563

  171 AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

  Fifty-four hVISA isolates collected during the period of 2020, 2021
  and 2022 were subjected to whole genome sequencing. Denovo sequences
  were annotated using patric.brc.org software and obtained assembly
  files. SCCmec and sequence types were determined through Centre for
  Genomics Epidemiology (CGE) server (Center for Genomic Epidemiology)
  (Table 6.20 and Figure 6.7A).The antibiotic resistance gene profiles
  of 54 hVISA isolates against antibiotic classes such as
  aminoglycoside, methicillin, penicillin, macrolide,
  trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole, fusidic acid, mupirocin, and
  tetracycline was studied. The most common genes were mecA (100%), blaZ
  (91%), mphC (57%), msrA (56%), aac (6')-aph (2'')_1 (56%),
  aph(3')-III_1 (56%), ermC (54%), and dfrG (43%) (Table 6.21A and
  Figure 6.7B). Fifty four isolates of hVISA were screened for virulence
  genes such as pvl, tsst, hlg, enterotoxins and intercellular adhesion
  (ica) based on WGS sequencing. The most common virulence gene detected
  was ica genes (87%), hld (87%), hla (87%), followed by hlb (83%), pvl
  (81%), TSST (18%) and the least one was selk (15%) (Table 6.21B).

  Table 6.20: SCC mec types and Sequence types among hVISA isolates
  (n=54) based on WGS

[]

[]

  172 AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

[]

  173 AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

[]

  Figure 6.7A: Overall sequences types of hVISA isolates among (n=54)
  (2020, 2021, 2022)

[]

  Figure 6.7B: Zone wise distribution of most common sequences types of
  hVISA isolates

[]

  174 AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

  Table 6.21A: Profile of antibiotic resistance genes among (n=54) hVISA
  isolates (Predicted by WGS sequence)

[]

175. AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

  Table 6.21 B: Profile of virulence genes in hVISA isolates (n=54)

[]

[]

176. AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

[]

[]

177. AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

[]

Note: P- Positive, N-Negative

[]

178. AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

  Whole genome sequence analysis of hVISA isolates for the period of
  2020, 2021 and 2022

  Molecular typing of hVISA isolates by WGS

  SCCmec and sequence types of (n=54) hVISA was determined using centre
  for genomics software. The most common SCCmec type was V (45%)
  followed by SCCmec IV (39%) and III (7.8%). Nineteen different STs
  (ST1, ST5, ST6, ST7, ST8, ST22, ST25, ST30, ST88, ST239, ST672, ST772,
  ST789, ST2233, ST2256, ST2990, ST1482 and ST4133) were identified. The
  majority belonged to ST772 (31%), ST8, ST22 (9%), ST672 (7%), followed
  by ST1, ST5, ST239 (5.5%) and ST6, ST789 (3.7%). These sequences typed
  belonged to eight distinct clonal complexes (CC1, CC5, CC8, CC15,
  CC22, CC30, CC45 and CC97). There were 8 singletons (ST8, ST2233,
  ST1482, ST291 and ST2672).

  MLST analysis revealed that there is genetic diversity among hVISA
  isolates across the country. The most predominant clone was ST772,
  accounting for 31% of the isolates, followed by ST8, ST22, and ST672.
  However, in JIPMER 2021 and 2022 isolates, ST239, ST772, and ST672
  were the most common. The clonal complexes of CC1 and CC8 were found
  in 57.4% of the isolates from various centers, with CC8 predominating
  in JIPMER, followed by CC1 and CC30. In the southern zone, ST772 and
  ST239 were more common, while in the northern zone, STT772 and ST672
  were prevalent. In the western zone, ST772 followed by ST22 were
  common, and in the eastern zone, ST772 was the most predominant ST.
  These findings suggest that a few clones may be circulating across the
  country. Eight isolates were identified as singletons, with four from
  the north (ST291, ST672, ST1482), three from the west (ST88, ST672,
  ST2233), and one from the south (ST672).

  ST772 hVISA isolates in the current study were more commonly
  associated with SCCmec V while ST22 was more commonly associated with
  SCCmec IV. These findings are consistent with a previous study
  conducted in India (Dhawan et al., 2015; D'souza et al., 2010;) which
  reported a similar association in MRSA isolates. Majority of ST772
  isolates harboured PVL genes while ST22 isolates harboured TSST genes.
  ST672 isolates were associated with SCCmec IV and V. Similar finding
  were reported in Australia by Coombs et al 2011.

  Whole genome sequencing of Linezolid Non Susceptible and Susceptible
  E. faecium isolates

  Cfr genes were detected only in the linezolid resistant isolate
  showing high level resistance. The other resistant isolate with lower
  MIC possessed only optrA along with 23s RNA (G2576T). There was no
  linezolid resistance mechanism detected in the sensitive isolate. The
  VRE isolate alone showed the entire van operon while the VVE isolate
  lacked the regulatory gene, vanR. All three isolates had the tetL,
  tet(M), ermB and ermT genes, which code for tetracycline and macrolide
  resistance, respectively.

[]

  179 AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

  The msrC gene, which is chromosomally encoded and expressed in
  Enterococcus faecium and confers resistance to erythromycin and other
  macrolide streptogramin B antibiotics was present in the LR-VVE
  (315747) and LS-VRE (348961) (Table 6.22).

  Table 6.22: Profile of antibiotic resistance genes among Linezolid Non
  Susceptible and Susceptible E. faecium isolates (2021) (Predicted by
  WGS sequence)

[]

[]

  180 AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

  Chapter 7. Streptococcus pneumoniae

  The S. pneumoniae isolates were studied from various hospitals within
  India. The invasive isolates include S. pneumoniae isolated from
  sterile specimens such as CSF, blood and body fluids in children less
  than 5 years of age. The non-invasive isolates include S. pneumoniae
  isolated from respiratory specimens (Sputum).

  Serotype Distribution:

  A total of 81 invasive (Child<5 years n=20, children >5 years and
  adult n=61) and 128 non-invasive (child n=5, adult n=123) S.
  pneumoniae isolates were included in the analysis. The majority of the
  invasive isolates were from blood (n=63), followed by CSF (n=12) and
  sterile fluids (n=6). The serotype distribution among the invasive and
  non-invasive isolates of S. pneumoniae is depicted in Table 7.1 and
  Figure 7.1. The predominant serotypes were 19F, 19A and 9V with >5
  number of isolates among the invasive isolates. Whereas, among the
  non-invasive, serotypes 19F, 6A, 35B and 18C were predominant with >6
  number isolates. The Pneumosil serotype percentage coverage was 44%
  and 42% for the invasive and non-invasive S. pneumoniae, respectively.
  The non-vaccine serotypes were more than 50% of the total isolates.
  Among the serotypes not included in the Pneumosil (PCV10Sii),
  serotypes3, 18C and 4, constitute 10% of the invasive isolates and
  serotype 18C alone holds 5-6% among both the invasive and the
  non-invasive isolates. The predominant first five non-vaccine
  serotypes were serotypes 35B, 15B, 13, 34 and 17F.

  Table 7.1: The number of serotypes among the invasive and non-invasive
  isolates of Streptococcus pneumoniae

[]

[]

  181 AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

  []

[]

Serotype distribution among the invasive and non-invasive S.

pneumoniae (2022)

  30

  25

  Figure 7.1: The serotype distribution of invasive (n=81) and
  non-invasive (n=128) isolates of S. pneumoniae

[]

  182 AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

  Antimicrobial Susceptibility Profile

  The penicillin and cefotaxime antimicrobial susceptibility percentage
  of invasive S. pneumoniae isolates were calculated based on meningeal
  or non-meningeal criteria (Table 7.2 and Figure 7.2). This is due to
  the different breakpoints of penicillin and cefotaxime of meningeal
  and non-meningeal isolates. The penicillin and cefotaxime non
  susceptibility was high in meningeal isolates than the non-meningeal
  isolates. The antimicrobial susceptibility profile for antibiotics
  other than penicillin and cefotaxime is given in Table 7.3 and Figure
  7.3. The antimicrobial susceptibility profile of non-invasive isolates
  is depicted in Table 7.4 and Figure 7.4.

  Table 7.2: Number of S. pneumoniae invasive isolates susceptible to
  penicillin and cefotaxime

[]

[]

  Antimicrobial Susceptibility percentage of invasive isolates

  120

  80

  60

40. 32

20

0

  Figure 7.2: Penicillin and cefotaxime antimicrobial susceptibility of
  invasive isolates of S. pneumoniae (n=81)

[]

183. AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

  Table 7.3: Number of invasive isolates susceptible to Erythromycin,
  Levofloxacin, Linezolid, Vancomycin, Chloramphenicol, Cotrimoxazole

[]

[]

  Antimicrobial Susceptibility profile of invasive isolates (n=81)

  [] S % [] R %

  Figure 7.3: Antimicrobial susceptibility profile of invasive isolates
  of S. pneumoniae for antibiotics other than penicillin and cefotaxime
  (n=81)

  Table 7.4: Number of non-invasive isolates susceptible to
  levofloxacin, erythromycin and penicillin

[]

  Penicillin(n=16) 16(100)

  Erythromycin(n=113) 43(35)

  Levofloxacin(n=115) 111(97)

[]

  184 AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

  []

  120

  [] S % [] R %

Figure 7.4: Antimicrobial Susceptibility profile of non-invasive
isolates (n=128)

Clinical relevance and treatment guidance

The Pneumosil serotype percentage was similar in the invasive and the
non-invasive, 44 % and 42% respectively. Serotypes 3, 4 and 18C
constitute an additional 10% and 9 % in the invasive and non-invasive
isolates of which serotype 18C contributes more than half the number
among the 9% in the non-invasive. This denotes the percentage reduction
in vaccine serotypes and the increase of non-vaccine serotypes. The
impact of the replacement of the PCV13 vaccine by Peumosil (Sii) has to
be monitored since serotype 18C is predominant in the non-invasive
compared to the invasive isolates. The next predominant non-vaccine
serotypes among the invasive isolates were 16F, 35B, 15B, 13 and 34. The
antimicrobial non-susceptibility to penicillin and cefotaxime is
decreasing gradually. Hence, monotherapy with either of these
antibiotics is not recommended for meningeal infections. Current ICMR
guidelines of combination therapy (cephalosporins with vancomycin) are
recommended. While for non-meningeal infections, penicillin and
cephalosporins are observed to be effective.

[]

  185 AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

  Chapter 8. Diarrhoeal bacterial pathogens

  Number of diarrheal pathogens studied during 2022 was comparatively
  lesser (0.6%) than the previous years. The isolates belonging to
  Vibrio cholerae, Campylobacter spp and Clostridium difficile were not
  reported from any sites. Antimicrobial susceptibility profile
  (phenotypic) of isolates received from other centres and nodal centre
  showed a similar trend.

  Aeromonas species

  Distribution of Aeromonas spp. from faeces showed annual increase in
  the number of positives from n=131 in 2017 to n=164 in 2022. Isolates
  from faeces and other sources were highly susceptible to cefixime,
  meropenem and tetracycline. In contrast, % susceptibility to
  ciprofloxacin was low (7.8% - 8.5%) (Table 8.1).

  Year wise distribution of Aeromonas sp. from 2017 – 2022 showed an
  increase in susceptibility to carbapenems (both imipenem and
  meropenem). Conversely, percentage susceptibility to tetracycline and
  ciprofloxacin remained the same over the years (Table 8.2 and Figure
  8.1).

  Table 8.1: Susceptible pattern of Aeromonas spp

[]

[]

  186 AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

  Table 8.2: Yearly susceptible trends of Aeromonas spp from faeces

[]

[]

100

90

80

70

60

Susceptibility 50

  40

  30

  % 20

10

0

  Year-2017 Year-2018 Year-2019 Year-2020 Year-2021 Year-2022

  []Tetracycline []Ciprofloaxcin

  Figure 8.1: Yearly susceptible trends of Aeromonas spp

  Shigella species

  Taxonomic distribution of Shigella spp. from 2019 indicated
  consistently increasing

  prevalence of Shigella sonnei over the dominant Shigella flexnerii.
  Among the 91 isolates

  characterized, Shigella flexneri (56.04% n=51/91) was the dominant
  species followed by

  Shigella sonnei (42.8% n=39/91) (Table 8.2). Antimicrobial
  susceptibility profile of Shigella

  spp. showed that S. sonnei is highly susceptible (76.9%) to ampicillin
  while S. flexnerii showed

  only 11.8% susceptibility. Percentage susceptibility to cefixime also
  showed S. sonnei being

  highly susceptible (79.5%) whereas almost half the numbers of S.
  flexnerii are resistant

  (46.8%). In contrast, S. sonnei is relatively less susceptible to
  Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole

  (23.1%) while S. flexnerii showed 52% susceptibility (Table 8.2).

[]

  187 AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

  Year-wise susceptibility trend of S. flexneri (2017 -2022) showed
  declining susceptibility to both ampicillin and cefixime. On the other
  hand, there is a slight increase in the percentage susceptibility to
  Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (Table 8.3; Figure 8.2).

Table 8.1: Susceptible pattern of Shigella species

[]

  Table 8.2: Yearly susceptible trends of Shigella flexneri

[]

[]

100

90

80

70

60

50

40

30

20

10

0

  Year-2017 Year-2018 Year-2019 Year-2020 Year-2021 Year-2022

  []Cefixime []Ampicillin []Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole

Figure 8.2: Yearly susceptible trends of Shigella flexneri

[]

  188 AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

  Similarly, the year wise susceptibility trend of S. sonnei has been
  analysed and the data showed a similar trend over the years
  (2017-2022). The percentage susceptibility remained almost same and
  were mostly non-susceptible (40-50%) to first line antibiotics such as
  ampicillin and co-trimoxazole, although a slightly increased co
  trimoxazole susceptibility is noted, its clinical relevance to
  repurpose is poor present (Table 8.4; Figure 8.3).

  Table 8.4: Yearly susceptible trends of Shigella sonnei

[]

120

[]

100

80

60

40

20

0

  Year-2017 Year-2018 Year-2019 Year-2020 Year-2021 Year-2022

[]Cefixime []Ampicillin []Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole

  Figure 8.3: Yearly susceptible trends of Shigella sonnei

[]

  189 AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

  Diarrheagenic E. coli (DEC)

  A total of n=189 DEC were isolated during 2022. The susceptibility
  report of DEC showed that isolates being less susceptible to
  first-line agents such as ampicillin (3.2%),
  Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (30.1%), Nalidixic acid (9.1%) and
  cefixime (3.2%) (Table 8.5). Year-wise susceptibility trend from 2019
  to 2022 again showed the percentage susceptibility being constant for
  all four tested antimicrobials (Table 8.6; Figure 8.4).

  Table 8.5: Susceptible pattern of DEC

[]

  Table 8.6: Yearly susceptible trend of DEC

[]

[]

40

30

20

10

0

  Year2019 Year2020 Year2021 Year2022

  []Ampicillin []Cefixime []Nalidixic acid
  []Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole

  Figure 8.4: Yearly susceptible trend of DEC

[]

  190 AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

  Vibrio cholerae

  A total of 38 Vibrio spp. isolates were reported of which n=32 were
  phenotypically characterized as Vibrio cholerae. Susceptibility to
  trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole was found to be the lowest (50%;
  n=16/32) and thus this antibiotic should not be recommended for
  treatment (Table 8.7). However, susceptibility to ampicillin (84.4%)
  and tetracycline (90.6%) are reported to be >80% and can be considered
  as treatment options. Year-wise susceptibility trend of V. cholerae
  from 2017 to 2022 showed the percentage susceptibility being constant
  over the years. The susceptibility trend of
  Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole varied from 17% - 50% while
  susceptibility to ampicillin ranged from 40

  – 85% (Table 8.8 and Figure 8.5). High susceptibility was observed for
  tetracycline (>90%) throughout the study period (2017 – 2022).

  Table 8.7: Susceptible pattern of Vibrio cholerae and Vibrio spp

[]

  Table 8.8: Yearly susceptible trends of Vibrio cholerae

[]

[]

  191 AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

120

[]

100

  80

  60

  40

  20

  0

  Year-2019 Year-2020 Year-2021 Year-2022

  []Tetracycline []Ampicillin []Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole

Figure 8.5: Yearly susceptible trends of Vibrio cholerae

Increasing resistance to third generation cephalosporins and
azithromycin warrants the development of new antibiotics or re-purposing
of existing antibiotics as these are among the few therapeutic options
left for moderate to severe Shigella infections. Further molecular
analysis of Shigella isolates showed presence of genes encoding
resistance to β-lactams, trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole, and
fluroquinolones. The genotypic presence of AMR genes correlated with the
phenotypic AST profile. No significant change in the AMR gene profile
was identified. Unlike the global trend of increased XDR incidence and
its dissemination, only few cases of XDR isolates are reported from our
study.

Clinical relevance and treatment guidance

Continuation of treatment with third generation cephalosporin /
azithromycin is suggested after analysing its susceptibility and
administration of fluroquinolone may be paused. Reporting of any
third-generation cephalosporin / azithromycin resistant isolates of
these pathogens may be appropriately communicated to the nodal centres.

AST profile of V. cholerae isolates indicates decreased susceptibility
to trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (50%) and hence is not recommended for
treatment. Owing to high susceptibility, ciprofloxacin and tetracycline
may be considered as treatment options and azithromycin is recommended
only in case if ciprofloxacin / tetracycline resistance is found. In
total, with increasing AMR and decreased arsenal of antibiotics together
with the paucity of new drugs, continued monitoring of AMR trends among
diarrheagenic is critical and every participating centre should watch
closely the appearance of resistant isolates and report to the nodal
centers appropriately.

[]

  192 AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

Characterisation of resistance mechanism

PCR based molecular testing was applied for the molecular
characterization and identification of different strains of E. coli
namely, Enteroinvasive Escherichia coli (EIEC)/Shigella,
Enterohemorrhagic Escherichia coli (EHEC), Enteropathogenic Escherichia
coli EPEC. PCR positives for ipaH &eaeA, stx1 & stx2, and bfpA
identified the isolates as EIEC/Shigella, EHEC and EPEC respectively.

PCR based molecular typing for the common resistance mechanism in
different diarrheagenic pathogens was done. PCR positive for the
amplification of TEM, OXA, dhfr, sul1, CTX-M qnrS/B indicated the
resistance to penicillins and early cephalosporins, oxacillin and
related anti-staphylococcal penicillins (presence of some OXA, like
OXA-48 may also warrant carbapenem resistance), trimethoprim,
sulfonamides and Extended-spectrum beta-lactamases (ESBLs) activity
conferring resistance to most beta-lactam antibiotics, including
penicillins, cephalosporins, and the monobactam aztreonam respectively.

[]

  193 AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

  Chapter 9. Fungal pathogens

  Total number of fungal isolates studied during the year 2022 was 3237
  (3%). The antifungal susceptibility testing (AFST) profiling of
  Candida species (C. tropicalis, C. albicans, C. glabrata, C.
  parapsilosis, C. auris, C. krusei and C. utilis) isolated from all
  specimens revealed 95.5% fluconazole susceptibility in C. albicans,
  93.5% in C. tropicalis, 85.5% in C. utilis and 83% in C. parapsilosis
  but only 1.9% in C. auris; 98.8% voriconazole susceptibility in C.
  krusei, 94.1% in C. albicans, 86.7% in C. parapsilosisand 23.1% in C.
  auris (Table 9.1). Notably, more than 95% of C. albicans and C.
  tropicalis showed susceptibility to echinocandins. However, C. auris
  showed variable resistance to echinocandins (caspofungin-24.4%,
  anidulafungin-16.5% and micafungin -5.1%) (Table 9.1).

  C. parapsilosis which is generally reported as less susceptible to
  echinocandins, exhibited significant susceptibility to echinocandins
  (caspofungin-97.5%, anidulafungin- 98.3% and micafungin - 97.7%) in
  the present study (Table 9.1). Interestingly, C. utilis, an emerging
  fungal pathogen, was found susceptible to all major classes of
  antifungals (i.e., caspofungin 95.2% and fluconazole 85.5%). Although
  two most common human fungal pathogens(C. albicans and C. tropicalis)
  showed the azole susceptibility in > 90%, increasing resistance rate
  over the recent years among these species is a major health concern
  (Table 9.1-9.3). C. tropicalis isolated from blood was more
  susceptible to anidulafungin (97.4 %) compared to isolates obtained
  from urine (90%) (Table 9.2 and 9.3). Further, decrease in antifungal
  susceptibility to majority of the antifungals among C. albicans, C.
  tropicalis, C. parapsilosis and C. glabrata needs to be cautiously
  monitored.

  The antifungal susceptibility testing (AFST) profiling across
  different locations of Aspergillus species isolated from all specimens
  was mentioned in Table 9.4. A. flavus and A. fumigatus were among the
  leading moulds isolated from clinical samples.

  Table 9.1: Susceptible pattern of Candida species isolated from all
  samples

[]

[]

  194 AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

  Table 9.2: Susceptible pattern of Candida species isolated from blood

[]

  * Less than 20 samples

  Table 9.3: Susceptible pattern of Candida species isolated from Urine

[]

  * Less than 30 samples

  Table 9.4: Susceptible pattern of Aspergillus species isolated from
  all samples across different locations

[]

  * Less than 20 samples

[]

  195 AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

Invasive infections due to multidrug-resistant C. auris continue to be
reported across many centers. C. auris was isolated from seven centres,
highest number of C. auris isolates were from New Delhi (RC6=28),
followed by Kolkata (RC8=16) and Chennai (RC10). Echinocandin resistant
C. auris was isolated from three centres (Figure 9.1). Susceptibility
trends of seven Candida species have been shown in figure 9.2.

[]

  RC17

  RC 6

  RC 8

  RC 10

  RC 19

  RC 21

  RC 5

Figure 9.1: Distribution of C. auris

[]

  196 AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

  Candida albicans

  Candida tropicalis

[]

  Candida parapsilosis

  Candida glabrata

  Candida krusei

[]

  Candida auris

  Figure 9.2: Susceptibility trends over the years in seven major yeasts
  species

[]

  197 AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

Clinical relevance and treatment guidance

Following the earlier trend, C. tropicalis and C. albicans were reported
as leading candidemia agents, followed by C. glabrata and C.
parapsilosis. Resistance rate against echinocandins was below 5% for
most of the species, making them the most suitable drugs for treatment.
Fluconazole resistance was also below 10% for the two foremost causing
agents. High levels of voriconazole resistance in C. albicans need to be
closely examined. Lesser isolates of C. parapsilosis were found to be
resistant against fluconazole compared to last year (17% vs. 22%). C.
auris being multidrug resistant showed near complete resistance (88%)
against fluconazole and up to 25% resistance against caspofungin. Among
emerging Candida species, decreasing isolation rate of C. utilis was
reported consecutively for last two years, however comparable isolation
trend was observed for Wickerhamomyces anomalus. Looking at the
susceptibility patterns of different Candida species, echinocandins and
fluconazole remain the best options for the management of these
infections.

As per the susceptibility patterns, echinocandins and fluconazole seem
to be the best treatment option for C. albicans and C. tropicalis
infections. Although fluconazole resistance was towards the lower side
in C. parapsilosis spp. this year, still either echinocandins or
voriconazole can be recommended in the infections caused by these
species. Declining susceptibility of C. glabrata to caspofungin and
fluconazole justifies micafungin, anidulafungin and voriconazole as
better treatment option against C. glabrata infections. Echinocandins
(more specifically anidulafungin) and voriconazole are the suitable
treatment choices for invasive infections due to C. krusei. C. auris
infections with near complete resistance to azoles can be better treated
with echinocandins as suggested by the antibiogram of the current
report. Emerging pathogenic yeasts, C. utilis and W. anomalus, can be
effectively treated with azoles and echinocandins.

The increasing prevalence and azoles resistance in Meyerozyma
guilliermondii in our study is concomitant with the published data. This
surge can further complicate the clinical scenario leading to treatment
failure or recurrence. Two important attributes of fluconazole
resistance (ergosterol content reduction and biofilm formation) were
represented in the present report. Thorough investigations into the drug
resistance mechanisms are hence justified.

Characterisation of resistance mechanism

The in vitro AFST was performed according to CLSI guideline by using M27
microbroth dilution method on 87 isolates against multiple azoles,
amphotericin B and two echinocandins. Epidemiological cutoff values
(ECVs) were implemented according to the CLSI M57S guideline to identify
non- wildtype strains (Table 9.3). Only 2 isolates (10-03-01-56 and
10-11-09-22) had fluconazole MICs (8 and 16 mg/L) and originated from
Qatar and The Netherlands, respectively. The W. anomalus ERG11 gene was
located and subsequently aligned to C. albicans ERG11. Isolate
10-11-09-22 harbored an I469L

[]

  198 AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

  substitution, while no substitutions were found in the other
  fluconazole resistant isolate. The ERG11 I469L substitution was in a
  hotspot region of C. albicans. To investigate the potential impact of
  this substitution on fluconazole resistance, an ERG11 homology model
  was constructed, based on a Saccharomyces cerevisiae CYP51 template
  with a 70.65% sequence identify and a MolProbity Score of 1.14. The
  I469 position is in close proximity to the heme-binding site, which is
  also used by azole derivatives. No substitutions solely present in
  fluconazole resistant isolates were found for UPC2 and ERG3. With
  nucleotide blast, efflux transcription factors TAC1 and MRR1 could not
  be identified based on orthologous C. albicans genes.

  Table 9.3: In Vitro AFST metrics for W. anomalus (n=87), according to
  CLSI M27 standard in RPMI-1640 media.

[]

  AMB, amphotericin B; FLU, fluconazole; ITC, itraconazole; VOR,
  voriconazole; ISA, isavuconazole; AFG, anidulafungin; MFG, micafungin;
  GM, geometric mean; MIC, minimal inhibitory concentration.

  In the present study, the specific, reproducible, and sensitive high
  resolution STR type scheme for W. anomalus was demonstrated. This
  assay includes amplification of six markers which consists of two
  multiplex PCRs. The total genotyping of 90 W. anomalus isolates
  identified 38 different genotypes, unveiling four simultaneous
  outbreak events across Indian hospitals. Further, STR and WGS SNP
  genotyping correlating well indicates the high resolution of this STR
  typing scheme. Interestingly, the construction of an ERG11 homology
  model with SWISS MODEL based on yeast (Saccharomyces cerevisiae), a
  significant role of the I469L substitution in fluconazole resistance
  was demonstrated.

[]

  199 AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

Chapter 10.Healthcare Associated Infections

This report provides comprehensive details of blood stream infections
(BSIs) and Urinary tract infections (UTIs), and Ventilator Associated
Pneumonia (VAP) reported from January, 2022 to December, 2022 from a
network of 39 hospitals across India. The network hospitals in this
report are part of the ICMR’s AMR network and hospitals which have
voluntarily joined the network. The methodology, SOPs and trainings
modules for HAI surveillance are provided on our website
www.haisindia.com. During the period from January, 2022 to December,
2022, a total of 106 ICUs from the 39 Centres reported Healthcare
Associated Infections (HAI) rates to our centralized database. Medical
and Neonatal ICUs accounted for 17.9 and 14.2 % of the total ICUs in our
network. Six (5.7%) ICUs in the network during this period were
dedicated COVID ICUs.

The cumulative patient days for the network for this period was 3,
12,310. A total of 1, 03,079 Central line days and 1, 67,272 urinary
catheter days were reported during this period. A total of 1,747
episodes of blood stream infections and 539 episodes of urinary tract
infections were reported, accounting for the total BSI rate to be 5.08
per 1,000 patient days and total UTI rate to be 1.63 per 1,000 patient
days. A fatal outcome (14-day outcome) was reported in 44.3% of BSIs and
23.2% UTI cases. However, this is not the attributable BSI or UTI
mortality, since other predisposing factors, underlying critical illness
and other infections also contribute to patient’s mortality in the ICUs.

Gram-negative bacteria (GNB) accounted for 74.4% of all BSI cases; 8.6%
were due to Candida sp. For UTI, GNB accounted for 57.7% cases.
Klebsiella spp. (30.4%) was the most common GNB and Enterococcus spp.
(52%) was the most common Gram-positive cocci (GPC) causing BSIs. 75% of
Klebsiella pneumoniae and 88% of Acinetobacter baumannii causing BSIs
were imipenem resistant. Nearly 87% of Staphylococcus aureus and around
42% of Enterococcus faecium causing BSIs were respectively oxacillin and
vancomycin resistant.

The focus of this network has been on generation of quality assured HAI
data and to assess the impact of infection prevention and control on the
rates of HAIs. The network hospitals reported AMR according their own
running systems (Manual/ Automated) and not all hospitals used the same
set of antimicrobials. Moreover, speciation was not done uniformly by
all hospitals; several of the organisms were identified only till genus
level. Efforts will be made to strengthen and homogenize AMR reporting
across the network and to ensure that the HAI causing strains are also
made part of the Quality Assurance work of ICMR so that AMR data is
quality assured.

The AMR-HAI burden is an important metric, considering the fact that
ICUs are the hot beds for AMR infections, which may cause adverse
outcomes. ICU- based surveillance, coupled with IPC will help in the
reduction of overall AMR in individual hospitals.

This HAI Surveillance work is primarily ICU based, considering the high
rate of device utilization in the ICUs. The most common ICUs represented
in this network are Medical, Neonatal, Paediatric Medical and Surgical
ICUs. Six ICUs during the reporting year were

[]

200. AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

  converted to COVID ICUs. The distribution of ICUs is shown in table
  10.1. This surveillance focused on BSIs (Primary and secondary BSIs)
  and UTIs (Catheter associated and non-catheter associated). Blood and
  urine cultures were taken into consideration for fulfilling the
  surveillance definitions (www.haisindia.com). The distribution of
  organisms from blood and urine cultures is shown in table 10.2.
  Enterobacterales were the most common, followed by non fermenting
  Gram-negative bacteria. The denominators for calculation of HAI rates
  during this period are shown in Table 10.3

  Table 10.1: Distribution of ICUs in the network

[]

[]

  201 AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

Table 10.2: Specimen wise distribution of major groups of organisms
isolated from BSIs and UTIs

[]

Table 10.3: Denominator Data

[]

Network Level BSI data

A total of 1,585 cases of BSIs were reported by the network. The
distribution (types) of BSI cases is shown in table 10.4. The total BSI
rate in our network was 5.08/1,000 patient days, with the CLABSI rate
being 6.7/ 1,000 central line days. The rates of BSIs, Primary BSIs,
CLABSIs and Secondary BSIs are shown in Table 10.5. The rates of total
BSIs were compared against different types of ICUs, since the morbidity
of patients varies with the different types of ICUs. Table 10.6 compares
the rates of BSIs across the different ICU types in our network. Of the
1,747 cases of BSIs, males accounted for 63%, as shown in table 10.7.
However, no interpretation can be made from this data. It may reflect a
higher admission rate in the ICUs.

Table 10.4: Types of BSI cases

[]

[]

  202 AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

  Table 10.5: BSI rates

[]

  Table 10.6: Distribution of BSI cases by ICUs

[]

[]

  203 AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

Table 10.8 shows the duration of stay in the ICUs and the duration
between ICU admission and the development of BSI. The duration of ICU
stay is a risk factor for development of HAIs. Some patients had a very
prolonged ICU stay and invariably, the BSI cases were found more in
patients who had a longer ICU stay, across all ICU types. The 14-day
mortality in cases of BSIs was 44.3%. This may not be the actual
attributable mortality, since severe primary illness or other underlying
co-morbidities may be contributing to the fatal outcome. Nearly 40% of
BSI cases were discharged at 14-day. Table 10.9 shows the short-term
outcomes of BSI cases. A total of 1,747 pathogens were isolated from the
BSI cases. Gram-negative organisms predominated as the cause of BSIs in
our network, as shown in Table 10.10.

Table 10.8: Median and range of ICU stay for BSI cases

[]

Table 10.9: Outcomes of BSIs

[]

[]

  204 AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

[]

Total number of organisms reported

  (N - 1,747)

  Gram Positive

Gram Negative

Fu ngi

  296 (16.9)

1,300 (74.4)

151 (8.6)

5.  Enterobacter sp.: 38 (2.9)

6.  Others: 85 (6.5)

Figure 10.1: Distribution of organisms causing BSIs

The genus level distribution in Gram-negative and Gram-positive orga
nisms and species distribution of Candid a causing overall BSIs is shown
in tables 10.11-10.13. Enterococcus spp. was the most common
Gram-positive organism; Klebsiella sp was the most common Gram-neg ative
organism and Candida tropicalis was the most common fungal pathogen.

[]

  205 AMR Surveillance Netw ork, Indian Council of Medical Research,
  2022

Table 10.11: Distribution of Gram-positive organisms causing BSIs (Total
BSIs)

[]

Table 10.12: Distribution of Gram-negative organisms causing BSI (Genus
level)

[]

Table 10.13: Distribution of Candida sp. causing BSIs

[]

[]

  206 AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

  Central line associated blood stream infections (CLABSIs) data

  The denominator in cases of CLABSI is taken as the central line days.
  The risk of developing CLABSIs varies with the position of the Central
  lines. Table 10.14 shows the locations of Central lines in our
  surveillance data. Even in CLABSIs, Gram-negative pathogens
  predominated over Gram-positives. A high proportion of CLABSIs were
  caused due to Candida spp. in our network. The distribution of
  organisms, Gram-positive, Gram-negative and Candida species causing
  CLABSIs is shown in tables 10.15-10.18.

  Table 10.14: Location of Central lines

[]

[]

  Table 10.16: Distribution of Gram-positive organisms causing CLABSIs

[]

[]

  207 AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

  Table 10.17: Distribution of Gram-negative organisms causing CLABSIs
  (Genus level)

[]

[]

  Data of Primary Non-CLABSIs

  Non-CLABSI Primary BSIs are the BSI cases for which no secondary
  sources are traced and that do not have a central line in place
  for >/= two calendar days. The organism distribution of Non- CLABSI
  Primary BSIs is shown in tables 10.19-10.22.

  Table 10.19: Distribution of organisms causing Non-CLABSI primary BSIs

[]

[]

  208 AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

  Table 10.20: Distribution of gram-positive organisms causing
  Non-CLABSI Primary BSIs

[]

  Table 10.21: Distribution of Gram-negative organisms causing
  Non-CLABSI Primary BSIs (Genus level)

[]

  Table 10.22: Distribution of Candida sp. causing non-CLABSI Primary
  BSIs

[]

[]

  209 AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

  Data of Secondary BSIs

  Secondary BSIs are those cases of BSIs in which a source of infection
  is found at some other body site and bacteremia is secondary to a
  primary source. The organism distribution in cases of secondary BSIs
  is shown in tables 10.23-10.26.

  Table 10.23: Distribution of organisms causing Secondary BSI

[]

[]

  Table 10.25: Distribution of Gram-negative organisms causing Secondary
  BSIs (Genus level)

[]

[]

  210 AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

  AST in isolates causing BSIs

  A high rate of resistance was seen against third generation
  cephalosporins, carbapenems, fluoroquinolones and aminoglycosides in
  Klebsiella pneumoniae, E. coli and Acinetobacter baumannii causing
  BSIs. The rate of resistance in Pseudomonas aeruginosa was less as
  compared to these. Minocycline and Tigecycline appear to be a
  promising alternative in Klebsiella and Acinetobacter sp (Table
  10.27). Almost 40% strains of E. faecium causing BSIs were vancomycin
  resistant.

  Table 10.27: % Susceptibility of Gram-negative organisms causing BSIs
  in HAI Surveillance Network

[]

[]

  211 AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

  Table 10.28: % Susceptibility of Enterococcus species causing BSI,
  2022

[]

[]

  Urinary Tract Infections (UTI) data

  A total of 505 cases of UTIs were reported. The distribution and
  profile of UTIs is shown in table 10.30. The catheter associated UTI
  (CAUTI) rate was 2.76/1,000 urinary catheter days, as shown in table
  10.31. The rates of total UTIs were compared against different types
  of ICUs, since the morbidity of patients varies with the different
  types of ICUs. Table 10.32 compares the rates of UTIs across the
  different ICU types in our network.

  Table 10.30: Type of UTI cases

[]

[]

  212 AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

  Table 10.31: UTI rates

[]

  Table 10.32: Distribution of UTI cases by ICUs

[]

  Table 10.33: Distribution of UTI cases by Gender and Age

[]

[]

  Table 10.34 shows the duration of stay in the ICUs and the duration
  between ICU admission and the development of UTI. The duration of ICU
  stay is a risk factor for development of HAIs. Some patients had a
  very prolonged ICU stay and the UTI cases were found more in patients
  who had a longer ICU stay, across all ICU types. The 14-day mortality
  in cases of UTI was 23.2%. This may not be the actual attributable
  mortality, since severe primary

[]

  213 AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

  illness or other underlying co-morbidities may be contributing to the
  fatal outcome. 22.3% of UTI cases were discharged at 14-day. Table
  10.35 shows the short- term outcomes of UTI cases. A total of 539
  pathogens were isolated from the UTI cases. Gram-negative organisms
  predominated as the cause of UTIs in our network, as shown in Table
  10.36-10.38.

  Table 10.34: Duration between ICU admission and development of UTI

[]

  Table 10.35: Outcome of UTI cases

[]

[]

-   In this surveillance network, Candida sp. was also included, in
      order to understand the epidemiology and significance of
      Candiduria.

[]

  214 AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

  Table 10.37: Distribution of organisms causing UTI (Genus level)

[]

  Table 10.38: Distribution of organisms (species level) causing UTI

[]

[]

  215 AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

AST of organisms causing UTI

A high rate of resistance was seen against third generation
cephalosporins, carbapenems, fluoroquinolones, colistin, and
aminoglycosides in Klebsiella pneumoniae, E. coli and Acinetobacter
baumannii and Pseudomonas aeruginosa causing UTIs; nearly 60% isolates
of Enterococcus faecium were vancomycin resistant.

Table 10.39: % Susceptibility of Gram-negative organisms causing UTIs in
HAI Surveillance Network

[]

[]

  216 AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

  Table 10.40: % Susceptibility of Enterococcus species causing UTI,
  2022

[]

  Table 10.41: % Susceptibility of Staphylococcus aureus causing UTI,
  2022

[]

  ∞ numbers too low

[]

  217 AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

  Ventilator Associated Pneumonia (VAP) data

  Surveillance for VAP was started towards the end of 2022 using tailor
  made definitions for Indian ICUs. The definitions are being validated
  against the currently used global criteria for ventilator associated
  events. The data (table 10.42-10.45) below shows the preliminary
  findings from a few hospitals in the network.

  Table 10.42: ICU-wise distribution of total patient days and
  ventilator days

[]

  Table 10.43: Demographic details of VAP Patients under HAI
  surveillance network, 2022

[]

1.  Gender

3.  Time to infection

-   Outcome

  14-day Outcome

[]

  218 AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

  Table 10.44: Distribution of organisms isolated from VAP Patients

[]

  Table 10.45: % Susceptibility of Gram-negative organisms isolated from
  VAP patients

[]

[]

  219 AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

  Annexure I

[]

  List of participating centers

[]

  220 AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

  Annexure II

[]

  Compilation team (ICMR)

  Dr Sonam Vijay, PhD

  Dr Nitin Bansal, MD

  Dr Sanjay K Singh, Ph.D

  Ms Jasmine Kaur, MSc

  Dr (Maj Gen) Vinod Ohri, MD

  Dr Kamini Walia, Ph.D, MPH

  List of contributors

  Participating centers

[]

  221 AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022

[]

  Image credits

[]

  222 AMR Surveillance Network, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2022
